AO206 PROPULSION -1 (3-0-0-3)


MODULE 1

Operating principles of piston engines - thermal efficiency calculations - classification of piston engines. 
Propeller geometry, types, material for propellers, selection of propellers. 
Propeller theories Ideal Momentum and Blade element, Numerical 
problems on the performance of propellers using propeller charts. 
Illustration of working of gas turbine engine-the thrust equation. 
Factors affecting thrust - effect of pressure, velocity and temperature
changes of air entering compressor - methods of thrust augmentation.


MODULE 2

Internal flow and Stall in subsonic inlets. 
Relation between minimum area ratio and eternal deceleration ratio, Diffuser performance. 
Supersonic inlets - starting problem on supersonic inlets,shock swallowing by area variation. 
Real flow in nozzles and nozzle efficiency - losses in nozzles -equilibrium flow and frozen flow in nozzles- two phase flow in nozzles. 
Ejector and variable area nozzles - interaction of nozzle flow with adjacent surfaces, Thrust reversal. 
Classification of combustion chambers - combustion chamber performance. 
Effect of operating variables on performance - flame stabilization


FIRST INTERNAL


MODULE 3

Principle of operation of axial flow compressor. 
Work done and pressure rise - velocity diagrams. 
Degree of reaction - free vortex and constant reaction designs of axial flow compressor. 
Performance characteristics of axial flow compressors- stage efficiency calculations - cascade testing. 


MODULE 4

Principle of operation of centrifugal compressor. 
Work done and pressure rise - velocity diagrams - degree of reaction. 
Performance characteristics of centrifugal compressors 
Stage efficiency calculations.


SECOND INTERNAL


MODULE 5

Principle of operation of axial flow turbines- limitations of radial flow turbines- Work done and pressure rise. 
Velocity diagrams - degree of reaction - free vortex and constant nozzle angle designs. 
Performance characteristics of axial flow turbine- turbine blade cooling methods. 
Stage efficiency calculations - basic blade profile design considerations - matching of compressor and turbine.


MODULE 6

Operating principle of ramjet engine. 
Various components of ramjet engines and their efficiencies. 
Combustion in ramjet engine - critical, subcritical and supercritical
modes of operation -ramjet engine and its performance characteristics. 
Sample ramjet design calculations - flame stability problems in ramjet combustors -integral ram rockets. 
Characteristics of turboprop, turbofan and turbojet - performance characteristics.


Text Books: 
1. Timoshenko and Gere, "Mechanics of Materials", Tata McGraw Hill, 1993. 
2. Megson T M G, "Aircraft Structures for Engineering students" Elsevier , 2007 

References: 
1. Donaldson, B.K., "Analysis of Aircraft Structures - An Introduction", McGraw  Hill, 1993. 
2. Bruhn E F, "Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle Structures", Tri-State Off-set  Company, USA,1985 
3.Peery, D.J. and Azar,J.J., "Aircraft Structures", Ed.2, McGraw - Hill, N.Y,    1999. 