AO201 AIRCRAFT BASICS AND CONTROLS (2-1-0-3 )


MODULE 1

History of Flights - Balloon flight 
Ornithopters 
Early airplanes by wright brothers, biplanes and monoplanes 
Developments in aerodynamics, materials, structures and 
propulsion over the years 


MODULE 2

Physical properties and structure of the atmosphere, temperature, pressure and altitude relationships 
Newton's law of motions applied to aeronautics - evolution of lift, drag and moment 
Aerofoils, mach number, maneuvers. aerodynamic forces on aircraft 
Classification of NACA Aerofoils, aspect ratio, wing loading, centre of pressure and aerodynamic centre - aerofoil characteristics- lift, drag curves.


FIRST INTERNAL


MODULE 3

Different types of flight vehicles, classifications.  
Components of an airplane and their functions. 
Wing and Landing gear configurations. 
Conventional control, powered control, basic instruments for flying - typical systems for control actuation. 


MODULE 4

General types of construction, Truss, monocoque & semi-monocoque 
Typical wing structure 
metallic and non-metallic materials 
Use of aluminum alloy, titanium, stainless-steel and composite materials. 


SECOND INTERNAL


MODULE 5

Basic ideas about piston, turboprop and jet engines  
use of propeller and jets for thrust production -comparative merits, 
Propeller - Operating Principle , Propeller classifications, Forces acting on a propeller 
Principles of operation of rocket, types of rockets. 


MODULE 6

Basic Helicopter Aerodynamics  
Basic Helicopter Components and their functions. 
Types of rotor heads. Control mechanisms 
Hovering and Autorotation 


Text Books: 
1. Anderson, J.D., "Introduction to Flight", McGraw-Hill, 1995. 
2. A.C. Kermode,  Flight without Formulae  

References: 
1. Kermode, A.C., "Mechanics of Flight", Himalayan Book, 1997. 
2. Rotocraft Flying Hand Book- FAA H-8083-21, FAA, U.S DEPARTMENT OF      TRANSPORTATION. 
3. Aviation Maintenance Technician Hand Book-Power plant - Volume - I &II ,     FAA, Shroff     Publications, New Delhi.