AU202  ADVANCED THERMODYNAMICS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Fundamentals concepts-scope and limitations of thermodynamics. Thermodynamic systems- different types of systems - macroscopic and microscopic analysis - continuum - Properties- state - processes. Thermodynamics equilibrium - Equation of state of an
ideal gas -Real gas relations.


MODULE II

Laws of thermodynamics- Zeroth law of thermodynamics - Thermal equilibrium - Concept of temperature -
Thermometry -Temperature scales. Work and heat - law of thermodynamics- Concept of energy - First law for closed and open systems - Specific heats - internal energy and enthalpy - Steady flow energy equations - Joule Thompson effect.


---FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION---


MODULE III

Second law of thermodynamics- Various statements and their equivalence_ Reversible process and reversible cycles- Carnot cycles- Corollaries of the second law. Clausius inequality- Concept of entropy - Calculation of change in entropy in various thermodynamic processes -
Reversibility and irreversibility - Available and unavailable energy - Third law of thermodynamics.


MODULE IV

Thermodynamic relations - Combined first and second law equations - Hemholtz and Gibbs functions - Maxwell relations- Equations for specific heats, internal energy, enthalpy and entropy - Clausius-Clapeyron equations - applications of thermodynamic relations.


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION---


MODULE V

Properties of pure substances - PVT, PT and TS diagrams, Compressibility factor - Law of corresponding states, Mollier diagrams- Mixture of gases and vapours- mixture of ideal gases - Dalton's law - Gibbs law- Thermodynamic properties of mixtures-Numerical problems using steam
tables


MODULE VI

Different power cycles- Brayton cycle, reversed Brayton cycle, Lenoir cycle, Stirling cycle, Atkinson cycle, Rankine
cycle- Numerical problems based on power cycles.



Text Book:


1 P K Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi 2008.
2. Thermal Engineering by R.K.Rajput, Laxmi publications Ltd.
Data Book ( Approved for use in the examination):


References:


1. Thermodynamics an Engineering Approach by Yunus A Cengel& Michael A Boles
2. Engineering Thermodynamics by R.K. Rajput.
3. J. F. Lee and FW Sears, Engineering Thermodynamics, Addison-Wesleg Publishing Company, London, 1962.
4. M. A.chuthan, Engineering Thermodynamics,Prentice Hall of India Private Ltd,
5. New Delhi 2002.
6. J.P. Holman, Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill book company New York, 1988.
7. Mark W. Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamic, McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2001.
8. Roy T, Basic Engineering Thermodynamics, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi 1989.
9. Thermal Engineering by Mahesh M Rathore
