KERALA TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY 
CET Campus, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala-695016 
 
ORDINANCE For Bachelor of Technology  B.Tech./B.Tech. (Honours) 
 
In exercise of the Powers conferred under Clause 44 of the Ordinance, the Executive Committee of the University hereby promulgate the Ordinance for the University for the Academic Year 2015-2016.This Ordinance shall come into effect from the date of its publication in the Gazette. 
 
I N D E X 
 
01 Admission to Bachelor of Technology / B.Tech. / B.Tech. (Honours) 
 
02 Examination 
 
03 Eligibility for Award of Degree  

04 Fee structure 
 
05 Discipline of the student - Action against breach of discipline 
 
06 Action against breach of guidelines in Examinations - unfair measures in examination 
 
07 Miscellaneous Provisions:  
 
a) Language of Instruction and Evaluation 
b) Academic Calendar 
c) Branches of B. Tech. Programmes 
d) B. Tech. Programme Structure  
e)  Curriculum, List of Courses and Syllabi  
f) Faculty Advisor/Counsellor 
g) Course Registration and Enrolment 
h) Course Completion and Earning of Credits 
i) Core courses, Prerequisites and Electives
j) End Semester and Supplementary Examinations 
k) Summer Courses and Contact Courses   
l) Academic Assessment/Evaluation   
m) Eligibility to Continue  
n) Course Committees and Class Committees 
o) Eligibility for Grading 
p) Award of Grades 
q) Grades and Grade Points 
r) Academic Auditing 
s) Break of Study 
t) Revaluation and Grade Improvement 
u) Grade Cards 
v) B. Tech Degree  
w) B. Tech. (Honours)  
x) Discipline 
y) Academic Discipline and Welfare Committee 
z) Grievances and Appeals Committee

08. Amendment to Ordinance/Regulations/Rules Rules to carry out the purpose of the Ordinance Addendum



1. Admission to Bachelor of Technology / B.Tech. / B.Tech. (Honours) 
 
a. Eligibility for admission to the B.Tech., programme, admission policy and procedure shall be decided from time to time by following the guidelines issued by the Government of Kerala and the Government of India and other statutory body such as AICTE.   

b. Subject to Clause 1(a), Admission to B.Tech., shall be based on the guidelines given by the State and Central Governments on reservation. Candidates for admission to B.Tech., programme shall have passed the Higher Secondary Examination, Kerala or 12th Standard V.H.S.E., C.B.S.E., I.S.C or any other examination considered equivalent to the above mentioned ones. Other eligibility criteria for admission is currently prescribed by the Government of Kerala through Government orders which is based on the entrance examination conducted by the Commission for Entrance Examinations, Government of Kerala and the marks in the qualifying examination subject to the relaxations allowed for backward classes and other communities as specified from time to time. 

c. The Branches of study and number of students admitted are to be based on the approval by the All India Council for Technical Education and the Kerala Technological University.  

d. Notwithstanding all that is stated above, the admission policy may be modified from time to time by the University, particularly to confirm to directions from the Government of Kerala and the Government of India.

e. The B.Tech., / B.Tech. (Honours) programme is a credit based programme.  The duration of the B. Tech / B. Tech (Honours) programme will normally be four academic years spanning 8 semesters. The maximum duration shall be six academic years spanning 12 semesters. 

