8) Amendment to Ordinance/ Regulations/Rules 

Notwithstanding all that has been stated above, the University has the right to modify any of the above Ordinance/Rules/regulations from time to time. 
 
RULES: 

RU-1   Course Code and Course Number 
 
Each course is identified by a course code and a three digit number. The two letter code refers to the department offering the course or the knowledge segment of the course. The knowledge segment code is used when the course is to be offered by different departments either individually or together but having the same syllabus and course plan. 
 
Course Number: MA 101 - This refers to a course in Mathematics with the course number 101.  
Course Number:   BE   102 - This refers to a course in Basic Engineering. 
 
Course Number is a three digit number and the first digit refers to the Academic year in which the course is normally offered, i.e. 1, 2, 3, or 4 for the B. Tech. Programme of four year duration. Of the other two digits, the last digit identifies whether the course is offered normally in the odd (odd number), even (even number) or in both the semesters (zero). The middle number could be any digit. 
 
MA 101 is a course in Mathematics offered in the first semester. 
EE 344 is a course in Electrical Engineering offered in the sixth semester. 
PH 110 is a course in Physics offered both the first and second semesters. 
BE 102 is a course in Basic Engineering offered by one or many departments. 
 
These course numbers are to be given in the curriculum and syllabi.  
 
RU-2 Attendance 
Attendance is marked for each course. While 75% attendance is mandatory for writing the end semester examination in that course, students are expected to have 100% attendance. However under unavoidable circumstances students are permitted to take leave. Leave is normally sanctioned for any approved activity taken up by students outside the college covering sports and other extracurricular activities. Leave is also permitted on medical grounds or on personal exigencies. Leave of absence for all these is limited to 25% of the academic contact hours for the course. 

In case of long illness or major personal tragedies/contingencies the college Principal can relax the minimum attendance requirement to 60%, to write the end semester examination. This is permitted for one or more courses registered in the semester. Principal shall keep all records which led to his decision on attendance, for verification by the Academic Auditor. However this concession is applicable only to any two semesters during the entire programme.  In case of prolonged illness, break of study is permitted as per RU-3.  

RU-3 Break of Study 
A student is permitted to have a break of study.  
i) In case of accident or serious illness needing prolonged hospitalization and rest. 
ii) In case the student has a bright idea and would like to initiate a start-up  venture or develop a new product.   
iii)  In case of any personal reasons that need a break in study. 

For break of study due to illness, student should submit all necessary medical reports together with the recommendation of the doctor treating him giving definite reasons for break of study and its duration. Before joining back the student should submit the fitness certificate from the doctor who treated him. Students who want to initiate a start-up venture or a product development, have to submit a project report, clearly indicating the purpose, action plan, technical details, funding details and future plans to the college Principal. The Principal shall evaluate the proposal by constituting an expert team consisting of a technocrat and a bank executive and take an appropriate decision based on the team's recommendation. In the semester system followed by the University, break of study for an academic year is preferred over a semester break. 
Students who want a break in study due to personal reasons shall convince the Principal on the genuine need for it by giving authentic evidence for the same. 

RU-4  Leave of Absence 
Students who want to take leave under RU2 have to submit a leave letter to the teacher conducting the course. This letter is to be forwarded to the Head of the Department with recommendation of the teacher indicating the total leave of absence the student has so far availed. Leave is to be sanctioned by the Head of the Department. For medical leave over three days, medical certificate indicating the need for leave is required. After any medical leave exceeding five instruction days, on rejoining, the student has to produce the fitness certificate given by the doctor. 

RU-5  Comprehensive Examination 
This examination consists of two parts. Part one a written test and the other an oral one. The written examination shall be objective type of 1 hour duration and shall have 50 marks and is to be conducted by the concerned department. Chairman of the oral examination board shall be a senior faculty in the department and the members include two other faculty members of the department and an external expert from another academic institute or an industry. Oral examination shall carry 50 marks. Comprehensive examination may be conducted any time during the 6th semester with sufficient notice given to the students. 

RU-6  Seminar 
Students have to prepare a detailed report on the topic of the seminar and   submit it to the teacher concerned. The seminar is to be of 20 minutes duration with another 5 minutes given for questions and answers. All students in the class have to attend the seminar without fail. Evaluation will be based on the report, seminar presentation as well as on the ability of the student to answer the questions put forward. Faculty member in charge of the seminar and another faculty member in the department nominated by the Head of the Department are the evaluators for the seminar. Distribution of marks for the seminar is as follows.  
Marks for the report: 30% 
Presentation: 40% 
Ability to answer questions on the topic: 30% 
 
RU-7  Ragging 
Ragging of any nature is a criminal and non-bailable offence.  Involvement in ragging shall lead to stringent punishment, including imprisonment as per the law of the land. A student, whose involvement in ragging is established, shall be summarily dismissed from the college.  Each student of the Institute, along with his/her parent, is required to give an undertaking in this regard and the same is to be submitted at the time of registration. 