07 Miscellaneous Provisions: 


a. Language of Instruction and Examination. 
Unless otherwise stated, the language of instruction and examinations shall be English. 
 
b. Academic Calendar.  
The University shall publish in its website the academic calendar for every academic semester indicating the commencement of the semester and beginning of instruction. It will specify the course registration and enrolment dates, the schedule for mandatory internal tests for theory courses, dates by which laboratory/practical evaluations are to be completed, date for finalization of  internal marks, last instruction day in the semester, planned schedule of end semester examinations and result declaration as well as approved holidays falling within the semester.  Schedules for the supplementary examinations and result declaration dates are to be included in the calendar.  Summer course schedule and result declaration have also to be indicated in the calendar. Additionally colleges may publish their academic calendar, in line with the University academic calendar, indicating other schedules and events they plan to conduct during the semester.  
 
c. Branches of B. Tech. Programmes.  
The Branches of B. Tech. /B. Tech. (Honours) programme offered by the University are listed separately at the end of this Ordinance 
 
d. B. Tech. Programme Structure  
i) B. Tech. / B. Tech. (Honours) programme in all branches of study is structured on a credit based system following the semester pattern with continuous evaluation allowing flexibility for students to decide on the duration of programme completion. 

ii) The duration for the B. Tech. /B. Tech. (Honours) programme in all branches of study, will normally be 8 semesters.  

iii) The maximum duration shall be six academic years spanning 12 semesters. 

iv)  Each semester shall have 72 instructional days, followed by end semester examinations.  

v) A student can opt for B.Tech. (Honours) at the end of the fourth semester. 

vi) The  curriculum  of  any  branch  of  the  B. Tech. programme  is  designed to have a minimum of 180  academic credits and 2 additional pass/fail credits, for the award of the degree.   

vii) The University follows Credit System and Credits are apportioned among the following knowledge segments. 

B.Tech. Programme.  
       
Knowledge Segments  - Credits 
 
Basic Sciences - 10   [8 Theory+ 2 Labs]                 
Mathematics  - 16                
Humanities       				 9                
Basic Engineering - 29   [25 Theory +4 Labs]              
Professional Engineering - 89   [80 Theory +9 Labs]  
Electives  	- 15 
Seminar 	- 2 
Comprehensive Viva - 2 
Design Project   - 2 
Project      - 6 
Total Academic Credits: 80 
Student's Activities 	2  [Audit-Pass/Fail] 
Total credits for B.Tech. Degree  182 

Credits are assigned to courses based on the following general pattern.   
One credit for each lecture hour per week for one semester One credit for each tutorial hour per week for one semester One credit for each laboratory/ practical session of 2 or 3 hrs, per week for one semester 

viii) In a semester normally up to six lecture based courses and three laboratory/practical courses, carrying a maximum credit of 26, could be offered. 

ix) University may allow students to transfer credits they have earned at other Universities and Academic Institutions, as per the guidelines given by the Academic Committee and approved by the Board of Governors.  
 
x)  Student Activities Points: 
To be an engineer capable of competing globally, in addition to technical knowledge and skills, students should develop excellent soft skills, nurture team work and leadership qualities and have an entrepreneurial and trail blazing outlook. To achieve this, in addition to academics, students are to actively engage in co-curricular and extra-curricular activities. For such activities, points are allotted. On getting a minimum of 100 activity points the student passes the course and earns 2 credits which do not count for the CGPA but mandatory for the award of the degree. Listing of these activities and the maximum points that could be earned by engaging in them are given at the end of this document. Additional activities could be included in the list with the approval of the Academic Committee. 

e.  Curriculum, List of Courses and Syllabi  
 
i) Every branch of study in the B.Tech., programme will have a curriculum, list of courses, syllabi and course plans approved by the Academic Committee of the University. 

ii) Courses are categorized as Core Theory (CT), Core Practice (CP) and Electives (EL). 

iii) Each course has a course number. Course number includes the offering department or knowledge segment code and a three digit number. Knowledge segment code is used when a course is offered by any one or more departments with the same course content and syllabus. Details on this are given under Rule, RU-1. 
 
f.  Faculty Advisor/Counsellor 
 
 All students shall have faculty advisors whose role will be:- To guide and help students on academics To monitor their progress in academics and advise them To counsel them and hand-hold them in any difficulty  
 
g. Course Registration and Enrolment 
 
It is mandatory for students to register for the courses they want to attend in a semester. Students admitted freshly to the first semester, are advised to register for all courses listed for the semester. However they do not have to enrol for the semester. All other students are required to register at the end of the semester for the courses they desire to take in the coming semester. They have to enrol for these courses at the beginning of the new semester, based on the previous semester results.  This allows them to make changes in the list of courses already registered for. Before enrolment, students should clear all dues including any fees to be paid and should not have any disciplinary issues pending. The dates for registration and enrolment will be given in the academic calendar. Any late registration or enrolment, allowed up to 7 working days from the stipulated date, will attract a late fee. 

A student can withdraw from a course or substitute one already registered by another on valid reasons with the approval of the faculty advisor. However this has to be done within seven working days from the commencement of the semester. The maximum number of credits a student can register in a semester is limited to 26. 
 
h. Course Completion and Earning of Credits 
 
Students registered and later enrolled for a course have to attend the course regularly and meet the attendance rules of the university [RU-2] and appear for all the internal evaluation procedures for the completion of the course. Credits for the course are earned only on getting a pass grade in the composite evaluation.  
 
i) Core courses, Prerequisites and Electives 
 
All courses listed in the curriculum, other than the electives, are core courses.   Earning credits in the core courses is mandatory for the B. Tech. degree. For electives, failure to earn credits does not necessarily require repeating the course. Instead another approved elective is permitted as a replacement course by the faculty advisor concerned. For some courses there could be a prerequisite course completion requirement for registration. 
 
J)    Summer Courses  

Students who could not earn the required minimum credits at the end of the second or fourth semester have two options to continue with the studies. They may register again for the courses, when they are offered in the next academic year. However, there is also a provision to run summer courses in failed courses for these students who may register and attend the course and write the final examination. This provision is only for students who have got 45% or more in the internal evaluation for the courses they attended in the regular semester.  
Students should have 75% attendance in the summer course to write the examination. For the final grading their internal evaluation marks obtained in the regular semester in which they had undergone the course shall be applicable.  Summer courses are to be conducted for a minimum of 20 contact hours for each course. Summer courses are to be offered only at the end of the second and fourth semesters for the courses covered till that semester. They will be conducted either by all colleges or only by some, depending on the number of students registering for them. Details of summer courses planned will be announced by the colleges after the declaration of the even semester results. Final examination for summercourses will be conducted by the University. Based on the availability of faculty and the number of students opting for courses, it will be the prerogative of the colleges to decide on the summer courses to be offered.   Options for the fifth and higher semesters For higher semesters, i.e., fifth semester onwards, summer courses are not offered.  Failed students who have less than 45% marks in internal assessments have to register again for the course in the regular semester in which it is offered and complete the course as per the regulations and appear for the end semester examination. Failed students having 45% marks or more in internal assessments have the option to register again for the course as mentioned above or register only for the end semester examination without attending the course again. A separate registration format will be available for this. This option is available in all semesters.  
  
k)   Contact Courses 
 
If a student has to earn credits only just for one course to qualify for the degree after completing eight semesters of study, the college concerned may offer a contact course on a written request by the student.  The contact course is considered as fresh registration and is to be offered by the teacher concerned who shall conduct the internal evaluation procedures and allot the marks as per the regulations. Minimum contact hours for the course shall be 20.  The final examination will be conducted by the college and shall be monitored by the external academic auditor. Question paper for the examination will be given by the Controller of Examination. No grade above C shall be given for a contact course. 

l) Academic Assessment/Evaluation   
    
Academic Evaluation of Courses 
    University follows a continuous academic evaluation procedure.      Academic evaluation procedure and corresponding weights are as follows:- 

a) For theory courses: - 1/3rd weightage for internal evaluation and 2/3rd for end semester examination.  
For convenience, the maximum marks for internal evaluation and end semester examination for theory courses are fixed as 50 and 100 respectively. 
 
Scheme of evaluation is as follows. 
i) Two internal tests each of 20 marks and of one hour duration. (Internally by the College)  
ii) Tutorials/Assignments/Mini Projects carrying 10 marks.   (Internally by the College) 
iii) End Semester examination carrying 100 marks.  (Conducted by the University)
All the above evaluations are mandatory requirements to earn credits.  Students who have missed either the first or the second test can register with the consent of the faculty and the Head of the Department (HOD) concerned for a re-test which shall be conducted soon after the completion of the second test, but before the end semester examination. The re-test will cover both first and second test course plans. Those who have missed both the tests are not eligible to appear for the end semester examination. However if one misses both tests due to medical reasons or other personal exigencies, based on genuine evidence, a single test of 2 hour duration for 40 marks will be conducted covering the whole syllabus, before the end semester examinations. Decision on this will be taken by the Principal and verified by the external academic auditor. 
 
b) For Laboratory /Practical /Workshop courses 

i) Practical records /Outputs -60 marks   (Internally by the College) 
ii) Regular class Viva     - 10 marks (Internally by the College) 
iii) Final written test/quiz-  30 marks (Internally by the College) 

All the above assessments are mandatory to earn credits. If not, the student has to complete the course/assessments during his free time in consultation with the faculty members. On completion of these, grades will be assigned. In case the Practical /Laboratory/Workshop courses are not completed in the semester, grade I (incomplete) will be awarded against the course and the final grade will be given only after the completion of the course/assessments. 
 
 c)   Comprehensive Examination 

As students appear for placements from seventh semester onwards, comprehensive examination is to be completed in the sixth semester.  This examination will be a written cum oral examination covering broadly all courses so far completed [RU-5]. 

d) Seminar 

Each student has to give a seminar on a professional topic of current interest in consultation with the faculty member in charge of the seminar in the Department. The seminar will be evaluated based on RU-6 
 
e) Design Project 

Each student or a group of students has to take up a design project. The project topic could be arrived at in consultation with any faculty member in the department. The Evaluation of the project is to be done in two stages. Two project progress evaluations each carrying 20 marks and a final report evaluation and presentation of the project for 60 marks. The project supervisor and two other faculty members from the same or any other department, nominated by the Head of the Department form the evaluation board.  
 
f) Final Semester Project 

Students, either individually or in a small batch not exceeding four, have to do a project approved by their faculty supervisor. Evaluation scheme is given below:- 

i) Two progress assessments - 20%   by the faculty supervisor/s 
ii) Final Project Report  - 30%   by the Assessment Board 
iii) Project presentation and  Viva - 50%   by the Assessment Board 
If the project work is not completed satisfactorily, the student has to put in more work and appear again for assessment on a specified date, not earlier than one month after the first evaluation. If the student fails in the project, a fresh registration for the project for one semester is mandatory.  
The project assessment board shall consist of the following members.  
Chairman: Head of the Department 
Members: Project supervisor/s of the student 
     One faculty member from the Department 
     One faculty member from a sister Department 
     An external expert, either from an academic/research institute or industry 