m)     Eligibility to Continue  

A student has to earn a minimum number of credits in a semester to be eligible to register for the new courses offered in the next semester. In odd semesters if this requirement is not met, the student is to be forewarned and allowed to continue to the next even semester. However at the end of even semesters this requirement will be strictly implemented.  Summer courses are offered to those who do not satisfy this norm after the 2nd as well as the 4th semesters. Students who do not meet this requirement are not permitted to register for new courses in the higher semesters. They have to register for the failed courses in normal semesters in which they are offered subject to the limitations imposed by the ordinances and course timetable.  

Action plan, for dealing with course arrears in theory courses at the end of each semester to continue with the programme, is given below. Faculty advisors shall monitor advice and support the students in this. Students should be informed about the minimum cumulative credits requirement to register for higher semester courses. 

Eligibility Criteria for Registering for Higher Semester Courses 

Semester - Allotted Credits -Cumulative 	Credits -Minimum cumulative credits 

First - 24 - 24 - Not insisted 
Second 23 - 47 - 35 
Third - 24 - 71 - Not insisted 
Fourth - 23 - 94 - 80 
Fifth - 23 - 117 - Not insisted 
Sixth - 23 - 140 - 126 
Seventh - 22 - 162 - Not insisted 
Eighth - 18 - 180 

 
n)  Course Committees and Class Committees 

These committees are to be in place in each college affiliated to the University. 

a) Course Committee This is for common courses (electives are excluded) offered to students admitted for the B. Tech. programme irrespective of their branch of study. Each of such courses will have a course committee constituted by the Principal of the college. The chairman of the course committee shall be a senior faculty member not offering the course.  

Members:- 
i) All teachers offering the course. 
ii) Four student representatives nominated by the Principal.  
 
b) Class Committee 

Beginning from the third semester, all branches of study will have class committees for every semester constituted by the respective Heads of Departments.The chairman of the committee shall be a senior faculty member who does not offer any course during that semester.  

Members:- 
i) All faculty members teaching courses in that semester.  
ii) Two student representatives nominated by the head of the Department.  
The course committees and class committees shall meet at least thrice in a semester the first at the beginning of the semester, the second and the third after the first and the second internal tests respectively. Both committees should monitor the conduct of the courses, adherence to the course plan and time schedule, completion of the syllabus, standards of  internal tests, evaluation process and  difficulties faced by the students and take suitable remedial actions at the appropriate time. At the end of the semester, the committee should meet without student representatives to review the conduct of the course and finalize the internal assessment marks and approve them. 

o) Eligibility for writing the end semester examination and for grading

Students with 45% or more marks in internal assessment in a course shall only be permitted to write the end semester examination in that course. Those with less than 45% internal marks shall be awarded FE grade and have to register for the course again.  A student should have a minimum of 45% marks in the end semester examination to be eligible for grading in a course. Otherwise he/she will be considered to have failed in the course and an F grade will be awarded.  Internal marks given to the students who got 45% marks or more in the end semester examination shall be regulated in line with the end semester examination performance. Internal mark percentage shall not exceed 25% over the end semester mark %.   
(For example if the end semester mark % is 45, then the maximum internal mark % is to be 45+25 = 70 %.) 
In case the student writes the supplementary examination, the mark got in that will be taken into consideration for regulating the internal marks. Those who have more than 45% marks in the end semester examination are awarded the grade based on both internal assessment and end semester examination marks. A student earns credits for a course if the grade is P or above.  

p) Award of Grades 

Grading is based on the % marks obtained by the student in a course, as given in 7q. The grade card will only give the grades against the courses the student has registered. Semester grade card will give the grade for each registered course, Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) for the semester as well as Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA).  

q) Grades and Grade Points 

Grades and Grade Points as per UGC guidelines is to be followed by the University   

Grades - Grade Point (GP) - % of Total Marks obtained in the course 
O(Outstanding) -10 - 90% and above     
 A+ (Excellent) - 9 - 85% to 90% 
 A   (Very Good)  -  8 -  80% to 85% 
 B+ (Good) - 7 - 70% to 80% 
 B   (Above Average) - 6 -60% to 70% 
 C   (Average) - 5 - 50% to 60% 
 P   (Pass)  - 4 - 45% to 50% 
 F   (Fail)  -  0 - Less than 45% 
 FE - 0 - Failed due to eligibility criteria [7-o] 
 I  - Course Incomplete 

 SGPA and CGPA are calculated based on the above grading norms and are explained at the end of this document. 

r)  Academic Auditing 

The University shall have a detailed academic auditing procedure in place comprising of an internal academic auditing cell within the colleges and an external academic auditing for each college.  The internal academic auditing cell in each college shall oversee and monitor all the academic activities including all internal evaluations and examinations. This cell is to prepare academic audit statements for each semester at regular intervals. These reports are to be presented to the external academic auditor approved by the University, who will use it as a reference for his independent auditing and for the final report to the University. 
Academic auditing shall cover:- 

i) Course delivery covering syllabus, adherence to course plan, quality of question papers for internal examinations, internal evaluation, laboratory experiments, practical assignments, mini projects and conduct of practical classes and their evaluation. 
ii) Co-curricular and Extra-curricular activities available for students, their organization and the mechanism of monitoring of activities points earned by the students.  
iii) Academic functioning of the college encompassing students, faculty and college administration covering punctuality, attendance, discipline, academic environment,  academic accountability, academic achievements and benchmarking. 

s)  Break of Study 
 
A student may break study for a maximum duration of two semesters, preferably in one academic year, to initiate start-up ventures, product development etc. This is however permitted only on successfully completing the courses listed out in the first four semesters. Request for this with ample evidence to the seriousness of the venture should be forwarded to the college principal for approval.  [RU-3] 
 
Break of study on serious health reasons is also permitted with the approval of the college Principal. [RU-3] 
 
All such cases of break of study are to be reported to the University. In both the cases, the maximum duration for completing the B. Tech. programme will still be twelve semesters.  
 
t)  Revaluation and Grade Improvement 
 
There is no provision for revaluation of the end semester answer books or for improving the grade.  
 
However, the student is permitted to check the answer books of the end semester examination after the results are declared. Any discrepancy in evaluation could be brought to the notice of the teacher concerned who will initiate appropriate action on this. The decision of the Controller of Examination shall be final on this. 
 
u) Grade Cards 
 
Students who have written the end semester examination will be given the grade cards for the registered courses, in every semester by the respective colleges. On earning the required credits for the degree, a consolidated grade sheet for the B. Tech programme will be given by the University. 
 
v) B. Tech Degree  
 B.Tech. degree will not have any classifications like distinction or first class. 
 
w)  B. Tech. (Honours)  
 
Accredited departments in institutions, having at least two post graduate programmes, may offer B. Tech. (Honours). It should be noted that students with a CGPA above 8 at the end of the fourth semester and having no credit arrears only are eligible for this option.  As only selected institutions may have this provision, students cannot demand this or move later to an institute where this is available. Students have to earn 12 additional credits to get B. Tech (Honours). Furthermore their CGPA at the end of the programme should be 8 or higher. Those who opted for B. Tech (Honours) but unable to earn the required additional credits in 8 semesters  or whose final CGPA is less than 8 shall automatically fall back to the B. Tech. programme.  However, additional course credits and the grades thus far earned by them will be shown in the grade card but not included for the CGPA. 

x)  Academic Discipline and Malpractices in Examinations 

Every student is required to observe discipline and decorous behaviour.  Any act of indiscipline, misbehaviour and unfair practice in examinations will be referred to the Disciplinary Action Committee (DAC). Malpractices in examinations shall be viewed seriously and any such incident observed or reported by a faculty member or an invigilator associated with the examinations shall be reported to the Principal who in turn shall refer it to DAC. On the basis of the report and evidence available or gathered, DAC shall immediately initiate an enquiry giving the concerned student a chance to explain his/her case. Based on this the committee shall recommend the course of action in line with the guidelines formulated for this by the Controller of Examination of the University  and forward it to the Principal for action. Actions are to be based on the severity of the offence and are to be dealt with, on a course basis. Guidelines on this shall be given by the Controller of Examination which is to be followed by the Disciplinary Action Committee of the college.  
 
The student may appeal to the Grievances and Appeals Committee for a relook on the matter. Based on the committee's report, the Principal shall take a final decision on the matter.  
DAC shall be headed by a department head and shall have three other faculty members drawn from different departments as members. In case of malpractices in end semester examinations, the report given by the college DAC and the action taken by the Principal shall be intimated to the Controller of Examination of the University 

y)  Student's Welfare Committee 

Every college shall have a Student's Welfare Committee, constituted by the Principal of the college. This committee shall have at least three faculty members as members and the chairman shall be a senior faculty member in the rank of a Professor. This committee is entrusted with the task of looking after the welfare of the students by taking appropriate steps with the concurrence of the principal. 

z) Grievances and Appeals Committee 

Each college should have a Grievances Redress Committee constituted by the Principal to address the grievances of the students and to consider their appeals on any decisions made by the college. This committee consisting of at least three facmembers and chaired by a senior professor shall look into student's grievances and appeals and give its recommendations to the Principal for action. 