FT203 Food  Chemistry 3-1-0-4 


MODULE I

Introduction and water:  
Importance of food, Scope of food chemistry - Introduction to different food groups: their classification and importance -Water  -Structure of water molecule, types and properties of water, water activity and its importance , determination, water quality for food processing 


MODULE II 

Carbohydrates: 
Chemistry  of  carbohydrates - composition  and  structure- Definition, classification,  Simple  Sugars:  mono  and  disaccharides,  Hygroscopcity  &  solubility,  optical  rotation, mutarotation; sensory properties-sweetness  index,  caramelization, Maillard  reaction, Dextrose Equivalent, 
Degree of polymerisation; Sugar alcohols; Oligosaccharides: structure, nomenclature, occurrence, uses in foods. Polysaccharides:  Starch-  amylose  and  amylopectin-  properties,  thickening  & gelatinization,  modified  starches,  resistant  starch,  Dextrins  and  dextrans,  Starch hydrolsates - Malto dextrins and dextrins; Pectins, gums & seaweeds- gel formation & viscosity. Fiber- Cellulose & hemicellulose; Food sources, functional role and uses in foods.


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE III 

Protein: 
Classification,  structure  and  functions - Role  of  proteins  and  requirements -Amino acids-Definition, classification, properties Functions of proteins in foods - physical  and  chemical  properties  of  proteins,  Important  protein  sources- Milk, Meat, Fish, Egg and Cereal proteins - Texturized  proteins;  Food  sources, functional role and uses in foods.


MODULE IV 

Lipids:  
Review of structure, composition & nomenclature of fats. Non-glyceride components in fats  & oils; Properties  of fats  &  oils:  crystal formation, polymorphism,  melting  points, plasticity, isomerisation, unsaturation; Modification of fats: hydrogenation- cis and trans isomers,  inter-esterification,  acetylation,  Hydrolytic  rancidity  &  oxidative rancidity;  radiolysis  Shortening  power  of  fats,  tenderization,  emulsification,  polymerization;  Fat  replacements;  Food  sources, functional role and uses in foods 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE V 

Vitamins and additives: 
Definition -Classification,  general  sources,  structure,  properties,  functions  and dietary  requirements - deficiency  symptoms  of  vitamins  A,D,E,K,C  thiamins, riboflavin, niacin and biotin- role of minerals - Food colours and flavors - Food additives - classification  and  purpose - Role  of  thickeners,  sweeteners, stabilizers,  emulsifiers,  leaveners,  colours,  flavouring  agents,  preservatives - examples.
 

MODULE VI 

Biological Value: 
BMR - specific dynamic action caloric value of foods. Computing caloric requirements balanced diet - carbohydrate factor - Glycemic Index, fat in the diet. Protein nutrition. Essential Amino Acids. Nitrogen Balance - Quality of protein - Biological value of protein - Protein Malnutrition - Obesity - Vitamins & Minerals requirements


Text Book: 

1. Sivasankar, B, "Food processing and preservation" Prentice - Hall of India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi 2002. 
2. Srinivasan  Damodaran,  Kirk  L.  Parkin,  and  O.R. Fennema,  E, "Food Chemistry" 4 th Edition, CRC Press, New York2007. 
3. Chopra, H.K. and P.S. Panesar. " Food Chemistry". Narosa, 2010 

References: 

1. Charley, H, "Food Science" John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York 1982. 
2. Birch,  G.G., Brennan,  J.  G.  and  Parker,  K.  J,  "The  Sensory  Properties  of Foods" Applied Science Publication, London 1977. 
3. Robinson,  D.  S, "Food - Biochemistry  and  Nutritional  Value"  Longman Scientific and Technical, London 1987.