 FT207  Introductory Food Technology 3-0-0 -3 



MODULE I

Food Classification: 

Food definition; Categories; fruits and vegetables, dairy, cereals, pulses, oilseeds, fisheries, meat and poultry, consumer foods etc. nutrient composition, production, consumption, export, import etc. - statistics. Nutrients and vitamins in food. Major properties of food


MODULE II 

Food Processing:  

Need of Food processing, cause of deterioration, methods of preservation; ancient and modern methods. Primary, secondary, tertiary processing of them.. Different types of Food products; processed fruits, beverages, dairy, meat , fish, bakery confectionary, extruded products etc. brief explanation for types and method of preparation. Major microbes causing food spoilage Effect of temperature and other parameters on microbial action


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE III 

Food processing regulation bodies: 

Status of food processing sector in India; different segments; fruits and vegetables, dairy, cereals, pulses, fisheries, meat and poultry, consumer foods etc. – Major challenges and growth potential. Infrastructure development and government policies in above sectors; food parks, packaging centres, VAC, FPO, MPEDA, FSSA, MPCO,MMPO etc. NMFP,FDI, MOFPI and KINFRA; their roles. Role of food technologist in society. 


MODULE IV 
  
Units and dimensions:

Basic units, derived units Definition of basic physical quantities; force, weight pressure, work, energy system, viscosity etc. Systems of measurement, Unit Conversion, precision, accuracy rounding off rule, significant digits, Dimensional Analysis; consistency. 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE V 

Water activity : 

Shelf life of perishables, Water activity;concepts, Water – Role of water – Dietary requirements and sources – Important physical properties of water –Water  binding  in  foods – water  activity  and  activity  of  microorganisms –Controlling of water activity in foods – Experimental determination of water activity in foods. moisture content- wet basis, dry basis, determination, 

 
MODULE VI 

Packaging and regulations: Food packaging; purpose of packaging, types of packaging, Environmental aspects , food safety, regulations, ISO, BIS, AGmark, FSSAI, GMP, HACCP Waste management in food processing.


Text Book: 

1. P G Smith, Introduction to Food Process Engineering, 2011, Springer International Publishing   
2. Annual Report by Ministry of Food Processing, India 
 
References: 

1. Food processing Handbook  Ed. James G Brennan 2006 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 
2. Zeki Berk ,Food process engineering and technology, 2013, ELSEVIER