CS204   DATA STRUCTURES (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Introduction to programming methodologies - structured approach, stepwise refinement techniques, programming style, documentation - analysis of algorithms: frequency count, definition of Big O notation, asymptotic analysis of simple algorithms. 

Recursive and iterative algorithms.


MODULE II

Abstract and Concrete Data Structures- Basic data structures - vectors and arrays. Applications, 

Linked lists:- singly linked list, doubly linked list, Circular linked list, operations on linked list, linked list with header nodes, applications of linked list: polynomials.


MODULE III

Applications of linked list (continued): Memory management, memory allocation and de-allocation. First-fit, best-fit and worst-fit allocation schemes

Implementation of Stacks and Queues using arrays and linked list, DEQUEUE (double ended queue). Multiple Stacks and Queues, Applications.


MODULE IV

String: - representation of strings, concatenation, substring searching and deletion.

Trees: - m-ary Tree, Binary Trees - level and height of the tree, complete-binary tree representation using array, tree traversals (Recursive and non-recursive), applications. 

Binary search tree - creation, insertion and deletion and search operations, applications.


MODULE V

Graphs - representation of graphs, BFS and DFS (analysis not required) applications.

Sorting techniques - Bubble sort, Selection Sort, Insertion sort, Merge sort, Quick sort, Heaps and Heap sort. Searching algorithms (Performance comparison expected. Detailed analysis not required).


MODULE VI

Linear and Binary search. (Performance comparison expected. Detailed analysis not required)

Hash Tables - Hashing functions - Mid square, division, folding, digit analysis, collusion resolution and Overflow handling techniques.


Text Books:


1. Samanta D., Classic Data Structures, Prentice Hall India, 2/e, 2009.
2. Richard F. Gilberg, Behrouz A. Forouzan, Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach with C, 2/e, Cengage Learning, 2005.


References


1. Horwitz E., S. Sahni and S. Anderson, Fundamentals of Data Structures in C, University Press (India), 2008.
2. Aho A. V., J. E. Hopcroft and J. D. Ullman, Data Structures and Algorithms, Pearson Publication,1983.
3. Tremblay J. P. and P. G. Sorenson, Introduction to Data Structures with Applications, Tata McGraw Hill, 1995.
4. Peter Brass, Advanced Data Structures, Cambridge University Press, 2008
5. Lipschuts S., Theory and Problems of Data Structures, Schaum's Series, 1986.
6. Wirth N., Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs, Prentice Hall, 2004.
7. Hugges J. K. and J. I. Michtm, A Structured Approach to Programming, PHI, 1987.
8. Martin Barrett, Clifford Wagner, And Unix: Tools For Software Design, John Wiley, 2008 reprint.