CS207   ELECTRONIC DEVICES AND CIRCUITS (3-0-0-3)


MODULE I

Wave shaping circuits: 

Sinusoidal and non-sinusoidal wave shapes, Principle and working of RC differentiating and integrating circuits, Conversion of one non-sinusoidal wave shape into another.

Clipping circuits - Positive, negative and biased clipper.
Clamping circuits - Positive, negative and biased clamper. Voltage multipliers- Voltage doubler and tripler. Simple sweep circuit using transistor as a switch.


MODULE II

Regulated power supplies: 

Review of simple zener voltage regulator, Shunt and series voltage regulator using transistors, Current limiting and fold back protection, 3 pin regulators-78XX and 79XX, IC 723 and its use as low and high voltage regulators, DC to DC conversion, Circuit/block diagram and working of
SMPS.

Field effect transistors: JFET - Structure, principle of operation and characteristics, Comparison with BJT. MOSFET- Structure, Enhancement and Depletion types, principle of operation and characteristics.


---FIRST INTERNAL EXAM---


MODULE III

Amplifiers: 

Introduction to transistor biasing, operating point, concept of load line, thermal stability, fixed bias, self bias, voltage divider bias. Classification of amplifiers, RC coupled amplifier - voltage gain and frequency response. Multistage amplifiers - effect of cascading on gain and bandwidth.

Feedback in amplifiers - Effect of negative feedback on amplifiers.

MOSFET Amplifier- Circuit diagram and working of common source MOSFET amplifier.


MODULE IV

Oscillators: Classification, criterion for oscillation, analysis of Wien bridge oscillator, Hartley and Crystal oscillator.

Non-sinusoidal oscillators: Astable, monostable and bi-stable multivibrators using transistors (Only design equations and working of circuit are required, Analysis not required).


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAM---


MODULE V

Operational amplifiers: 

Differential amplifier, characteristics of op-amps(gain, bandwidth, slew rate, CMRR, offset voltage, offset current), comparison of ideal and practical op- amp(IC741), applications of op-amps- scale changer, sign changer, adder/summing amplifier, subtractor, integrator, differentiator.

Schmitt trigger, Wien bridge oscillator.


MODULE VI

Integrated circuits: 

Active filters - Low pass and high pass (first and second order) active filters using op-amp with gain (No
analysis required).

D/A and A/D convertors - important specifications, Sample and hold circuit.

Binary weighted resistor and R-2R ladder type D/A convertors. (concepts only).

Flash, dual slope and successive approximation type A/D convertors.

Circuit diagram and working of Timer IC555, astable and monostablemultivibrators using 555.



Text Books:


1. David A Bell, Electronic Devices and Circuits, Oxford University Press, 2008
2. Salivahanan S. and V. S. K. Bhaaskaran, Linear Integrated Circuits, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008


References :


1. Neamen D., Electronic Circuits, Analysis and Design, 3/e, TMH, 2007
2. Robert Boylestad and L Nashelsky, Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory, Pearson.
3. Bogart T. F., Electronic Devices Circuits, 6/e, Pearson, 2012.
4. Maini A. K. and V. Agrawal, Electronic Devices and Circuits, Wiley India, 2011.
5. K.Gopakumar, Design and Analysis of Electronic Circuits, Phasor Books, Kollam, 2013
6. Millman J. and C. Halkias, Integrated Electronics, 2/e, McGraw-Hill, 2010.