ME201 MECHANICS OF SOLIDS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Introduction to analysis of deformable bodies - internal forces - method of sections - assumptions and limitations. 

Stress - stresses due to normal, shear and bearing loads - strength design of simple members.

Definition of linear and shear strains.

Material behavior - uniaxial tension test - stress-strain diagrams concepts of orthotropy, anisotropy and 

inelastic behavior - Hooke's lawfor linearly elastic isotropic material under axial and shear deformation

Deformation in axially loaded bars - thermal effects - statically indeterminate problems - principle of superposition - 

elastic strain energy for uniaxial stress.

MODULE II

Definition of stress and strain at a point (introduction to stress and strain tensors and its components only) - 

Poisson's ratio - biaxial and triaxial deformations - Bulk modulus - Relations between elastic

Torsion: Shafts - torsion theory of elastic circular bars - assumptions and 15% limitations - polar modulus - 

torsional rigidity - economic cross-sections - statically indeterminate problems - shaft design for torsional load.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Beams- classification - diagrammatic conventions for supports and loading - axial force, shear force and 

bending moment in a beam

Shear force and bending moment diagrams by direct approach

Differential equations between load, shear force and bending moment.Shear force and bending moment diagrams by summation 

approach - elastic curve - point of inflection.


MODULE IV 

Stresses in beams: Pure bending - flexure formula for beams assumptions and limitations - section modulus - 

flexural rigidity economic sections - beam of uniform strength.

Shearing stress formula for beams - assumptions and limitations - design for flexure and shear


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Deflection of beams: Moment-curvature relation - assumptions and limitations - double integration method - 

Macaulay's method superposition techniques - moment area method and conjugate beam ideas for simple cases.

Transformation of stress and strains: Plane state of stress - equations of transformation - principal planes and stresses


MODULE VI 

Mohr's circles of stress - plane state of strain - analogy between stress and strain transformation - strain rosettes

Compound stresses: Combined axial, flexural and shear loads - eccentric loading under tension/compression - 

combined bending and twisting loads.

Theory of columns: Buckling theory -Euler's formula for long columns - assumptions and limitations - 

effect of end conditions - slenderness ratio - Rankin's formula for intermediate columns.


Text Book: 

1. Rattan, Strength of Materials, 2e McGraw Hill Education India, 2011
2. S.Jose, Sudhi Mary Kurian, Mechanics of Solids, Pentagon, 2015

References: 
1.S. H. Crandal, N. C. Dhal, T. J. Lardner, An introduction to the Mechanics of Solids, McGraw Hill, 1999
2. R. C. Hibbeler, Mechanics of Materials, Pearson Education,2008
3. I.H. Shames, J. H. Pitarresi, Introduction to Solid Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India, 2006
4. James M.Gere, Stephen Timoshenko, Mechanics of Materials, CBS Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi, 2012
5. F. Beer, E. R. Johnston, J. T. DeWolf, Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGraw Hill, 2011
6. A. Pytel, F. L. Singer, Strength of Materials, Harper & Row Publishers, New York,1998
7. E. P. Popov, T. A. Balan, Engineering Mechanics of Solids, Pearson Education, 2012
8. R. K. Bansal, Mechanics of solids, Laxmi Publications, 2004
9. P. N. Singh, P. K. Jha, Elementary Mechanics of Solids, Wiley Eastern Limited, 2012