HS300 Principles of Management (3-0-0-3)


MODULE 1

Introduction to Management: definitions, managerial roles and functions; Science or Art perspectives- External environment-global, innovative and entrepreneurial perspectives of Management (3 Hrs.) - Managing people and organizations in the context of New Era- Managing for competitive advantage - the Challenges of Management (3 Hrs.)   


MODULE 2

Early Contributions and Ethics in Management: Scientific Management- contributions of Taylor,  Gilbreths, Human Relations approach-contributions of  Mayo, McGregor's Theory, Ouchi's Theory Z (3 Hrs.) Systems Approach, the Contingency Approach, the Mckinsey 7-S Framework Corporate Social responsibility- Managerial Ethics. (3 Hrs) 


--FIRST INTERNAL EXAM ---


MODULE 3
 
Planning: Nature and importance of planning, -types of plans (3 Hrs.) - Steps in planning, Levels of planning - The Planning Process - MBO (3 Hrs.). 


MODULE 4
 
Organising for decision making: Nature of organizing, organization levels and span of control in management Organisational design and structure - departmentation, line and staff concepts (3 Hrs.) Limitations of decision making-Evaluation and selecting from alternatives- programmed and non programmed decisions  - decision under certainty, uncertainty and risk-creative process and innovation (3 Hrs.) 


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAM ----


MODULE 5

Staffing and related HRD Functions: definition, Empowerment, staff - delegation, decentralization and recentralisation of authority - Effective Organizing and culture-responsive organizations -Global and entrepreneurial organizing (3 Hrs.) Manager inventory chart-matching person with the job-system approach to selection (3 Hrs.) Job design-skills and personal characteristics needed in  managers-selection process, techniques and instruments (3 Hrs.) 


MODULE 6
 
Leading and Controlling: Leading Vs Managing - Trait approach and Contingency approaches to leadership - Dimensions of Leadership (3 Hrs.) - Leadership Behavior and styles - Transactional and Transformational Leadership (3 Hrs.) Basic control process- control as a feedback system - Feed Forward Control - Requirements for effective control - control techniques - Overall controls and preventive controls - Global controlling (3 Hrs.) 

Text Book 

Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich, Essentials of Management, McGraw Hill Education, 10th Edition. 

References 

1. Daft, New era Management, 11th Edition, Cengage 
2. Griffin, Management Principles and Applications, 10th Edition, Cengage 
3. Heinz Weirich, Mark V Cannice and Harold Koontz, Management: a Global, Innovative and Entrepreneurial Perspective, McGraw Hill Education, 14th Edition 
4. Peter F Drucker, The Practice of Management, McGraw Hill, New York 
5. Robbins and Coulter, Management, 13th Edition, 2016, Pearson Education 