HS210  LIFE SKILLS (2-0-2-3)

MODULE 1

Need for Effective Communication, Levels of communication; Flow of communication; Use of language in communication; Communication networks; Significance of technical communication, Types of barriers; Miscommunication; Noise; Overcoming measures,  
 
Listening as an active skill; Types of Listeners; Listening for general content; Listening to fill up information; Intensive Listening; Listening for specific information; Developing effective listening skills; Barriers to effective listening skills.  
   
Technical Writing: Differences between technical and literary style, Elements of style; Common Errors, Letter Writing: Formal, informal and demi-official letters; business letters, Job Application: Cover letter, Differences between bio-data, CV and Resume, Report Writing: Basics of Report Writing; Structure of a report; Types of reports.   
 
Non-verbal Communication and Body Language:  Forms of non-verbal communication; Interpreting body-language cues; Kinesics; Proxemics; Chronemics; Effective use of body language 
 
Interview Skills: Types of Interviews; Ensuring success in job interviews; Appropriate use of non-verbal communication, Group Discussion: Differences between group discussion and debate; Ensuring success in group discussions, Presentation Skills: Oral presentation and public speaking skills; business presentations, Technology-based Communication: Netiquettes: effective e-mail messages; power-point presentation; enhancing editing skills using computer software.   


MODULE 2

Need for Creativity in the 21st century, Imagination, Intuition, Experience, Sources of Creativity, Lateral Thinking, Myths of creativity

Critical thinking Vs Creative thinking, Functions of Left Brain & Right brain, Convergent & Divergent Thinking, Critical reading & Multiple Intelligence.   
 
Steps in problem solving, Problem Solving Techniques,  Problem Solving through Six Thinking Hats, Mind Mapping,  Forced Connections. 
 
Problem Solving strategies, Analytical Thinking and quantitative reasoning expressed in written form, Numeric, symbolic, and graphic reasoning, Solving application problems.   


MODULE 3

Introduction to Groups and Teams, Team Composition, Managing Team Performance, Importance of Group, Stages of Group, Group Cycle, Group thinking, getting acquainted, Clarifying expectations. 
 
Group Problem Solving, Achieving Group Consensus.    
 
Group Dynamics techniques, Group vs Team, Team Dynamics, Teams for enhancing productivity, Building & Managing Successful Virtual Teams. Managing Team Performance & Managing Conflict in Teams. 
 
Working Together in Teams, Team Decision-Making, Team Culture & Power, Team Leader Development.   


MODULE 4

Morals, Values and Ethics, Integrity, Work Ethic, Service Learning, Civic Virtue, Respect for Others, Living Peacefully.  
 
Caring, Sharing, Honesty, Courage, Valuing Time, Cooperation, Commitment, Empathy, Self-Confidence, Character,  
 
Spirituality, Senses of 'Engineering Ethics', variety of moral issued, Types of inquiry, moral dilemmas, moral autonomy, Kohlberg's theory, Gilligan's theory, Consensus and controversy, Models of Professional Roles, Theories about right action, Self-interest, customs and religion, application of ethical theories.   
 
Engineering as experimentation, engineers as responsible experimenters, Codes of ethics, Balanced outlook on. 
 
The challenger case study, Multinational corporations, Environmental ethics, computer ethics,  
 
Weapons development, engineers as managers, consulting engineers, engineers as expert witnesses and advisors, moral leadership, sample code of Ethics like ASME, ASCE, IEEE, Institution of Engineers(India), Indian Institute of Materials Management, Institution of electronics and telecommunication engineers(IETE), India, etc.  


MODULE 5

Introduction, a framework for considering leadership, entrepreneurial and moral leadership, vision, people selection and development, cultural dimensions of leadership, style, followers, crises. 
 
Growing as a leader, turnaround leadership, gaining control, trust, managing diverse stakeholders, crisis management   
 
Implications of national culture and multicultural leadership  Types of Leadership, Leadership Traits.  
 
Leadership Styles, VUCA Leadership, DART Leadership, Transactional vs Transformational Leaders, Leadership Grid, Effective Leaders, making of a Leader, Formulate Leadership


References: 
1. Barun K. Mitra; (2011), "Personality Development & Soft Skills", First Edition; Oxford Publishers.    
2. Kalyana; (2015) "Soft Skill for Managers"; First Edition; Wiley Publishing Ltd. 
3. Larry James (2016); "The First Book of Life Skills"; First Edition; Embassy Books.   
4. Shalini Verma (2014); "Development of Life Skills and Professional Practice"; First Edition; Sultan Chand (G/L) & Company 
5. John C. Maxwell (2014); "The 5 Levels of Leadership", Centre Street, A division of Hachette Book Group Inc. 


EVALUATION SCHEME 

Internal Evaluation (Conducted by the College) 

Total Marks: 100 

Part - A 

(To be started after completion of Module 1 and to be completed by 30th working day of the semester) 

1. Group Discussion - Create groups of about 10 students each and engage them on a GD on a suitable topic for about 20 minutes. Parameters to be used for evaluation is as follows; 
 
(i) Communication Skills  -  10 marks 
(ii) Subject Clarity -  10 marks 
(iii) Group Dynamics - 10 marks 
(iv) Behaviors & Mannerisms -10 marks 

Part - B 

(To be started from 31st working day and to be completed before 60th working day of the semester) 

2. Presentation Skills - Identify a suitable topic and ask the students to prepare a presentation (preferably a power point presentation) for about 10 minutes. Parameters to be used for evaluation is as follows; 

(i) Communication Skills* - 10 marks 
(ii) Platform Skills** - 10 marks 
(iii) Subject Clarity/Knowledge - 10 marks 

*. Language fluency, auditability, voice modulation, rate of speech, listening, summarizes key 
learnings etc. 
** Postures/Gestures, Smiles/Expressions, Movements, usage of floor area etc.
 
Part - C 

(To be conducted before the termination of semester) 

3. Sample Letter writing or report writing following the guidelines and procedures. Parameters to be used for evaluation is as follows; 
 
(i) Usage of English & Grammar -10 marks
(ii) Following the format -10 marks 
(iii) Content clarity  10 marks 
 
