MA201   Linear Algebra and Complex Analysis (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I
Complex Differentiation (Book I -sec.13.3,13.4) 

Limit, continuity and derivative of complex functions

Analytic Functions.

Cauchy - Riemann Equation(Proof of sufficient condition of analyticity & C R Equations in polar form not required)-Laplace's Equation.

Harmonic functions, Harmonic Conjugate.

MODULE II

Conformal mapping: (Book I - sec.17.1,17.4)

Geometry of Analytic functions Conformal Mapping

Mapping w = z^2 conformality of w = e^2 .
The mapping w= z+ (1/z)
Properties of w= 1/z

Circles and straight lines, extended complex plane, fixed points

Special linear fractional Transformations, Cross Ratio, Cross Ratio,property-Mapping of disks and half planes
Conformal mapping by w = sin z & w = cos z


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Complex integration(Book I - sec. 14.1 to 14.4 ,15.4 and 16.1) 

Definition Complex Line Integrals, First Evaluation Method, Second Evaluation Method

Cauchy's Integral Theorem(without proof), Independence of path(without proof), Cauchy's Integral Theorem for Multiply
Connected Domains (without proof)

Cauchy's Integral Formula- Derivatives of Analytic Functions(without proof)
Application of derivative of Analytical Functions

Taylor and Maclaurin series(without proof), Power series as Taylor series, Practical methods(without proof)

Laurent's series (without proof)


MODULE IV 

Residue Integration(Book I -16.2-16.4) 

Singularities, Zeros, Poles, Essential singularity, Zeros of analytic functions. 

Residue Integration Method, Formulas for Residues, Several singularities inside the contour Residue Theorem. 

Evaluation of Real Integrals (i) Integrals of rational functions of sinT and cosT (ii)Integrals of the type (f(x)dx  (Type I, Integrals from 0 to 8  )


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Linear system of Equations (Book I - sec. 7.3-7.5) 

Linear systems of Equations, Coefficient Matrix, Augmented Matrix

Gauss Elimination and back substitution, Elementary row operations,Row equivalent systems, Gauss elimination-Three possible cases,
Row Echelon form and Information from it.

Linear independence-rank of a matrix

Vector Space-Dimension-basis-vector spaceR3

Solution of linear systems, Fundamental theorem of nonhomogeneous linear systems(Without proof)-Homogeneous linear
systems (Theory only).


MODULE VI 

Matrix Eigen value problem (Book I - sec. 8.1,8.3 and 8.4) 

Determination of Eigen values and Eigen vectors-Eigen space

Symmetric, Skew Symmetric and Orthogonal matrices -simple properties (without proof)

Basis of Eigen vectors- Similar matrices Diagonalization of a matrix Quadratic forms- Principal axis theorem(without proof).


Text Book: 


1. Erwin Kreyszig: Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10th ed. Wiley. 


References: 


1. Dennis g Zill&Patric D Shanahan-A first Course in Complex Analysis with Applications-Jones&Bartlet Publishers
2. Grewal, B. S., Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi. 
3. Lipschutz, Linear Algebra,3e ( Schaums Series)McGraw Hill Education India 2005. 
4. Complex variables introduction and applications-second edition-Mark.J.Owitz-Cambridge Publication. 


