MA206 Probability & Statistics and Numerical Methods (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Discrete Probability Distributions  (Book I -sec.4.1,4.2,4.4,4.6)
Introduction to discrete random variables, Probability distribution function, Cumulative distribution function.

Mean and variance of discrete random variables.

Mean and variance of Binomial Distribution (proof).

Poisson Approximation to The Binomial Distribution (proof),Mean and variance of Poisson Distribution (proof).


MODULE II

Continuous Probability Distributions  (Book I -sec. 5.1,5.2,5.5,5.7 ) 
Continuous random variables, Probability density function,Cumulative distribution function, Mean and Variance.

Normal probability distribution, Standard normal distribution,Calculation of probabilities using normal distribution.

Uniform distribution, Mean and variance (proof).

Exponential distribution, Mean and variance (proof).


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Sampling Distributions(Book  I sec.  6.1, 6.2, 6.3,6.4,7.1,7.2 ) 
Population, Sample, Parameter and statistic.

Sampling distribution of Mean (s Known proof).Central Limit theorem (statement only).

Sampling distribution of Mean (s Unknown without proof),Sampling distribution of the variance (without proof).

Point Estimation, Interval Estimation, Interval estimation of mean (confidence interval).



MODULE IV 

Test Of Hypothesis (Book I sec.7.4,7.5,7.6,8.2,8.3) 

Introduction to testing a hypothesis, Null and Alternate hypothesis, Type I and Type II error, Level of significance.

Hypothesis concerning one Mean (small and large sample),P-value.

Test of significance in difference between means of two independent large samples. Test of significance in difference
between means of two independent small samples.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Numerical Techniques (Book II - sec. 19.1,19.2,19.3) 

Solution Of equations by Iteration-Newton- Raphson Method.

Interpolation of Unequal intervals-Lagrange's Interpolation formula.
Interpolation of Equal intervals-Newton's forward difference formula, Newton's Backward difference formula.



MODULE VI 

Numerical Techniques(Book II - sec.19.5,20.1,20.3, 21.1 ) 

Solution to linear System- Gauss Elimination, Gauss Seidal Iteration Method.

Numeric Integration-Trapezoidal Rule, Simpson's 1/3 Rule, Numerical solution of first order ODE-Euler method,
Runge-Kutta Method (fourth order).


Text Book: 

1. Miller and Freund's Probability and statistics for Engineers, Eighth Edition ( Pearson education). 
2. Erwin Kreyszig, "Advanced Engineering Mathematics", 10th edition, Wiley, 2015. 


References: 

1. Steven C. Chapra and Raymond P. Canale, "Numerical Methods for Engineers"-Sixth Edition.
2. V. Sundarapandian, "Probability, Statistics and Queuing theory", PHI Learning, 2009.
3.C. Ray Wylie and Louis C. Barrett, "Advanced Engineering Mathematics"-Sixth Edition.
4.Jay L. Devore, "Probability and Statistics for Engineering and Science"-Eight Edition.


