BT203 Concepts in Biochemical Engineering (4-0-0-4)


MODULE I

Biological concepts - Microbial world, important cell types, animal and plant cells, structure of 

cells, cell fractionation, cycles of life, Cell polymeric chemicals, their structure and

their functions, repetitive and non-repetitive biological polymers, hybrid biochemicals such as 

cell envelopes, antibody and other glycoproteins, the hierarchy of cellular organisation.


MODULE II

Cell growth and product synthesis - Nutritional requirements, metabolism and bioenergetics, batch 

growth, growth patterns and kinetics in batch culture, effect of environmental conditions on cell 

growth and product synthesis, Carbon catabolism - EMP pathway and other biochemical reaction 

networks, Respiration - TCA Cycle, Respiratory chain, Photosynthesis-light harvesting, End

products of metabolism, Substrate and product inhibition on cell growth and product formation, 

Maintenance, Patterns of substrate flow in cells synthesising products.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Enzymes as biocatalysts - similarities and differences between enzyme biocatalysts and chemical 

catalysts, Nomenclature and classification of enzymes. Chemical nature and properties of enzymes. 

Theory of enzyme action, Co-factors and co-enzymes. Substrate activation and inhibition,

enzyme deactivation, Simple enzyme kinetics, Applications of enzymes in industrial, pharmaceutical 

and analytical sectors with examples, advantages and disadvantages of enzyme-based production 

processes. Enzyme immobilisation.


MODULE IV 

Bioprocessing basics - intracellular and extracellular products, growth associated and non-growth 

associated products, yield coefficient and maintenance coefficient,

Bioprocessing using animal and plant cells, Modes of bioreactor operation - batch bioreactor, 

simple batch data analysis, Disadvantages of batch bioreactor, Continuous bioreactor, advantages 

of continuous bioreactor, Fed-batch, continuous with cell recycle, perfusion culture,

Photobioreactors, applications.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Bioreactors - Basic functions of a bioreactor, Bioreactors vs chemical reactors, Basic bioreactor 

configurations, keys to bioreactor selection, Component parts of a fermenter and their functions, 

Basic design aspects of a stirred tank fermenter, Aerobic fermentation processes, Oxygen demand in

fermentations, factors affecting oxygen demand, Oxygen supply, Balance between oxygen demand and 

supply, role of aeration and mixing in oxygen transfer, mechanism of mixing, radial and axial flow 

impellers, flow patterns in an unbaffled stirred tank, flow patterns for radial flow and axial

flow impellers in baffled stirred tanks, impeller selection.


MODULE VI 

Bioprocesses monitoring - common bioprocess parameters monitored or controlled, measurement of 

inlet gas flow rates, agitation rates, temperature, pH/redox, dissolved O 2 and CO 2 , reactor 

head space pressure, measurement of cell mass and common metabolites, metabolic state variables of 

the cells, respiratory quotient, on-line and off-line measurements, ion-specific sensors, 

biosensors - Enzyme and Microbial Electrodes.


References Books:

1. James E Bailey, David F Ollis, Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals, 2/e, McGraw-Hill Chemical Engineering Series, 1986.
2. Michael L Shuler, Fikret Kargi, Bioprocess Engineering Basic Concepts, Second Edition,Prentice Hall International PTR, 2002.
3. Pauline M Doran, Bioprocess Engineering Principles, Academic Press, 1995.
4. D G Rao, Introduction to Biochemical Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 2005.
5. Mukesh Doble, Sathyanarayanan N Gummadi, Biochemical Engineering, PHI Learning Pvt.Ltd., 2007.




