BT205 Bioprocess Calculations (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Fundamentals of material balances: Law of conservation of mass, types of material balance problems

- total and component balances, steady and unsteady state processes, batch and continuous 

processes. Concept of tie element, basis for calculations, independent material balance equations 

and degrees of freedom, steps for solving material balance problems - simple numerical examples.


MODULE II

Material balances without chemical reactions: Material balances for unit operations like 

evaporation, crystallization, drying, leaching, adsorption, extraction, absorption and 

distillation. Bypass, recycle and purging operations - simple numerical examples.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Material balances with chemical reactions: Definition of terms like limiting reactant, excess 

reactant, percentage yield and selectivity, extent of reaction- simple numerical examples. 

Combustion of solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, heating value of fuels, proximate and

ultimate analysis of coal, Orsat analysis. Recycle and purge involving chemical reactions - Simple 

Numerical examples


MODULE IV 

Fundamentals of energy balances: Law of conservation of energy, components of energy balance

equations- Heat and work, kinetic energy, potential energy and flow energy, internal energy and 

enthalpy - Heat capacities. Energy balance in cyclic processes, energy balance for flow and non- 

flow processes- simple numerical examples.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Material and energy balances for sterilization, industrial fermentation, downstream processing and 

waste treatment processes - simple numerical examples and case studies.


MODULE VI 

Stoichiometry of cell growth and product formation: Overall growth stoichiometry- medium 

formulation and yield factors, elemental material balances for growth, electron balances, product 

formation stoichiometry, theoretical oxygen demand and maximum possible yield - simple numerical 

examples.

Thermodynamics of microbial growth and product formation: Heat of reaction with and without oxygen 

as principal electron acceptor - simple numerical examples.


References Books:

1. K.V. Narayanan, B. Lakshmikutty, Stoichiometry and Process Calculations, Prentice Hall of India, 2006.
2. David M. Himmelblau, James B. Riggs, Basic Principles and Calculations in Chemical Engineering, Prentice Hall, 2012.
3. B.I. Bhatt, S.M. Vora, Stoichiometry, Fourth edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
4. P.M. Doran, Bioprocess Engineering Principles, 2/e, Elsevier- Academic Press, 2013.
5. R.M. Felder, R. W. Rousseau, Elementary Principles of Chemical Processes, 3/e, John Wiley and Sons, 2000.




