BT207 Microbiology (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Historical perspectives: Discovery of microbial world; Landmark discoveries relevant to the field 

of microbiology; controversy over spontaneous generation-Scope and relevance of microbiology. Role 

of microorganisms in transformation biotransformation.

Microscopic techniques: light microscopy, dark field microscopy, phase contrast microscopy, 

fluorescence microscopy, SEM, TEM, newer techniques: confocal microscopy, scanning probe 

microscopy.

Staining techniques: cell staining- simple staining, gram staining and acid fast staining; 

staining of specific structures.


MODULE II

Study of microbial structure: Eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell structure and function:

size, shape and arrangement, cell membranes, cell organelles, cell walls, component external to 

cell walls. Microbial chemotaxis, mechanisms of solute transport across cell

membranes.

Microbial taxonomy: Evolution and diversity of microorganisms, taxonomic ranks, classification 

systems, assessment of microbial phylogeny. Bacteria, archaea and their broad classification; 

Eukaryotic microbes: Yeasts, molds and protozoa; viruses and their classification, viroids and

prions.



--FIRST INTERNAL--



MODULE III

Microbial nutrition and cultivation: Nutrition of microorganisms; nutritional classes of microbes, 

Macro and micronutrients, sources and physiological functions of nutrients. Growth factors and 

their functions in metabolism.

Cultivation of microorganisms: Culture media- synthetic, complex media, solidifying agents, types 

of media - selective, differential and enrichment media, pure culture methods - spread plate, 

pour plate and streak plate, special techniques for cultivation of anaerobes.


MODULE IV 

Microbial Growth: Definition of growth; growth curve; mathematical expression of exponential 

growth phase; measurement of growth and growth yields; synchronous growth; effect of environmental 

factors on growth, growth in natural environments.

Control of microorganisms: Basic terminology- sterilization, disinfection, sanitization, 

antisepsis. Patterns of microbial death, physical methods for microbial control- heat,

low temperature, filtration and radiation. Use of chemical agents, evaluation of effectiveness of 

antimicrobial agents.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Microbial interactions and ecology: Types of microbial interactions - mutualism, protocooperation, 

commensalisms, predation, parasitism, amensalism, competition, symbiosis.

Biogeochemical cycles: cycles of nitrogen, carbon, sulphur and manganese.

Microorganisms in aquatic environments: microbial community in marine and fresh water environments,

microbiological analysis of water purity-sanitary tests for coliforms (presumptive test, confirmed 

test, competed test), MPN test, defined substrate test, IMVIC test. Quality standards for drinking 

water.

Soil microbiology: Soil as a habitat for microorganisms, physico-chemical properties of soil, 

microbial community in soil, role of microorganisms in organic matter decomposition.


MODULE VI 

Application of microbiology: Food microbiology- Role of microorganisms in food spoilage and 

contamination, food preservation methods - physical and chemical methods, food borne diseases and 

intoxications, examples of fermented food products.

Industrial microbiology- Microorganisms as biofertilizers and biopesticides, commercially 

important microorganisms for industrial fermentation.


References Books:

1. Prescott, Harley and Klein, Microbiology, McGraw Hill International Edition, 2008.
2. Pelczar M. J., E. C. E. Chan and N. R. Krieg, Microbiology, Tata McGraw Hill, 1993.
3. Ingraham J. L. and C. A. lngraham, Introduction to Micro Biology A Case History Approach, 3/e, Thomson Publications, 2003.
4. Brock, Biology of Microorganism, Prentice Hall, International Inc, 2005.
5. Schlegel H. G., General Microbiology, Cambridge University Press, 1993.

