BT201 Fluid Flow and Particle Technology (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Properties and nature of fluids - Ideal fluid, Real fluid, Density, Specific weight, Specific 

Volume, Capillarity and Surface Tension, Viscosity, Vapour pressure, Absolute and Gauge Pressures. 

Fluid Statics - Forces on fluids and hydrostatic equilibrium, Measurement of Pressure using 

different types of manometers. Forces on submerged bodies - Buoyancy, Stability of floating and 

submerged bodies.


MODULE II

Introduction to fluid flow- Flow of incompressible fluids- Classification of flow - Steady and 

unsteady state flow, uniform and non-uniform flow, Stream line, Streak line, Path line, Stream 

tube, Velocity Potential - Laminar and Turbulent flow - Reynold's Experiment. Equations of Change 

for isothermal systems - Equation of Continuity, Equation of Motion - Navier Stoke's Equation and 

Euler equation (derivations not required). Newtonian and non- Newtonian fluids - Momentum flux and 

Newton's Law of Viscosity. Flow in boundary layers - Boundary layer separation and Wake formation.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Flow through pipe - Bernoulli Equation, Correction factors in Bernoulli Equation, Pump work - 

Numerical problems, Shear stress and Velocity distribution in circular channel.

Hagen-Poiseuille Equation, Laminar flow of non-Newtonian fluids, Velocity distribution for 

turbulent flow, The friction factor chart, Fanning Equation- Numerical problems.

MODULE IV 

Transportation and Metering of Fluids - Pipes and tubes, Pipe joints, Valves - Materials of 

construction, Pumps- Reciprocating and Centrifugal pumps, Characteristics of centrifugal pumps - 

Priming, Cavitation, NPSH, Water hammer, Loss of head and power in centrifugal pumps,

Characteristic curves.

Flow measurement - Orifice meter, Venturi meter, Rotameter, Pitot tube, Weirs and notches, 

velocity meters


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Flow past immersed bodies- Drag coefficient - Flow through packed bed - Kozney Carman equation, 

Blake Plummer equation and Ergun equation. Motion of Particles through fluids - Motion from 

gravitational and Centrifugal fields - Terminal Settling velocity, Stoke's law- Intermediate

law - Newton's law - Hindered Settling. Fluidization - Advantages and disadvantages, Applications,

Minimum Fluidization velocity, Pressure drop-flow rate diagrams. Types of fluidization.

MODULE VI 

Particle technology - Describing the size of a single particle- Shape factor, mean diameter, 

Description of populations of particles, Particle size analysis-methods of particle size

measurement-Sieving, microscopy, sedimentation, permeametry, electrozone sensing, laser 

diffraction, ICI sedimentation, Photosedimentation, Elutriation, common methods of displaying size 

distribution-Arithmetic and Log- normal distributions. Particle size reduction - particle fracture

mechanisms, models for predicting energy requirements and particle size distribution, types of 

size reduction equipments, factors affecting choice of equipments. Particle size enlargement - 

interparticle forces, granulation, equipments for granulation. Solid-liquid separation-Filtration

and centrifugation, Sedimentation and Decantation, flocculation, Solid-solid separation - 

screening, air classification (theory only). Storage and transportation of bulk solids - Different

methods and types of conveyors.


References Books:

1. McCabe W. L., J. C. Smith and P. Harriott, Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering, 6/e, McGraw Hill, 2000.
2. Martin J. Rhodes, Introduction to Particle Technology, 2/e, John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
3. Coulson J. M and J. F Richardson, Chemical Engineering: Fluid flow, Heat transfer and Mass transfer (Vol - I), 5/e, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
4. Coulson J. M and J. F Richardson, Chemical Engineering: Particle technology and Separation processes (Vol - II), 5/e, Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
5. Perry R. H. and D.W. Green, Eds., Perry's Chemical Engineer's Handbook, 7/e, McGraw
Hill, 1997.

