ME205 THERMODYNAMICS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Role of Thermodynamics in Engineering and Science -- Applications of Thermodynamics

Basic Concepts - Macroscopic and Microscopic viewpoints, Concept of Continuum, Thermodynamic System and Control Volume, 

Surrounding, Boundaries, Types of Systems, Universe, Thermodynamic properties, Process, Cycle, Thermodynamic Equilibrium, 

Quasi - static Process, State, Point and Path function. (Review only- self study) Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics, 

Measurement of Temperature: Thermometry, reference Points, Temperature Scales, Ideal gas temperature scale, 

Comparison of thermometers-Gas Thermometers, Thermocouple, Resistance thermometer Energy - Work - Pdv work and 

other types of work transfer, free expansion work, heat and heat capacity

MODULE II

Joule's Experiment- First law of Thermodynamics - First law applied to Non flow Process- Enthalpy- specific heats- PMM1, 

First law applied to Flow Process, Mass and Energy balance in simple steady flow process.

Applications of SFEE, Transient flow -Filling and Emptying Process.

(Problems), Limitations of the First Law.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Second Law of Thermodynamics, Thermal Reservoir, Heat Engine, Heat pump - Performance factors, Kelvin-Planck and Clausius 

Statements, Equivalence of two statements, Reversibility, Irreversible Process, Causes of Irreversibility, Corollaries of 

second law, PMM2, Carnot's theorem and its corollaries, Absolute Thermodynamic Temperature scale. Clausius Inequality, 

Entropy- Causes of Entropy Change, Entropy changes in various thermodynamic processes, principle of increase of

entropy and its applications, Entropy generation in open and closed system, Entropy and Disorder, Reversible adiabatic 

process- isentropic process


MODULE IV 

Available Energy, Availability and Irreversibility- Useful work, Dead state, Availability function, Availability and 

irreversibility in open and closed systems - Gouy-Stodola theorem , Third law of thermodynamics. Pure Substances, 

Phase Transformations, Triple point, properties during change of phase, T-v, p-v and p-T diagram of pure substance, 

p-v-T surface, Saturation pressure and Temperature, T-h and T-s diagrams, h-s diagrams or Mollier Charts, Dryness Fraction,

steam tables. Property calculations using steam tables.



--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

The ideal Gas Equation, Characteristic and Universal Gas constants, Deviations from ideal Gas Model: Equation of 

state of real substancesVander Waals Equation of State, Berthelot, Dieterici, and Redlich-Kwong equations of state , 

Virial Expansion, Compressibility factor, Law of corresponding state, Compressibility charts 

Mixtures of ideal Gases - Mole Fraction, Mass fraction, Gravimetric and volumetric Analysis, Dalton's Law of 

partial pressure, Amagat's Laws of additive volumes, Gibbs-Dalton's law -Equivalent Gas constant and Molecular Weight, 

Properties of gas mixtures: Internal Energy, Enthalpy, specific heats and Entropy, Introduction to real gas mixtures- 

Kay's rule.

*Introduction to ideal binary solutions, Definition of solution, ideal binary solutions and their characteristics, 

Deviation from ideality, Raoult's Law, Phase diagram, Lever rule(*in this section numerical problems not )

MODULE VI 

General Thermodynamic Relations - Combined First and Second law equations - Helmholtz and Gibb's functions - 

Maxwell's Relations, Tds Equations. The Clapeyron Equation, equations for internal energy, enthalpy and entropy, 

specific heats, Throttling process, Joule Thomson Coefficient, inversion curve. #Introduction to thermodynamics of chemically reacting systems,

Combustion, Thermochemistry - Theoretical and Actual combustion processes- Definition and significance of equivalence 

ratio, enthalpy of formation , enthalpy of combustion and heating value (#in this section numerical problems not included)


Text Books

1. P.K.Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill,2013
2. E.Rathakrishnan Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics, PHI,2005

References Books:

1 Y. A. Cengel and M. A.Boles,Thermodynamics an Engineering Approach,McGraw Hill, 2011
2 G.VanWylen, R.Sonntag and C.Borgnakke, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, John Wiley & Sons,2012
3. Holman J.P, Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, 2004
4. M.Achuthan, Engineering Thermodynamics, PHI,2004

Steam Tables/Data book

5. R.S.Khurmi, Steam table with Mollier chart, S.Chand,2008