ME203 MECHANICS OF FLUIDS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Introduction: Fluids and continuum, Physical properties of fluids, density, specific weight, vapour pressure, 

Newton's law of viscosity. Ideal and real fluids, Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids. Fluid Statics- 

Pressure-density-height relationship, manometers, pressure on plane and curved surfaces, center of pressure, buoyancy, 

stability of immersed and floating bodies, fluid masses subjected to uniform accelerations, measurement of pressure


MODULE II

Kinematics of fluid flow: Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches, classification of fluid flow, 1 -D, 2-D and 3-D flow, 

steady, unsteady, uniform, non-uniform, laminar, turbulent, rotational, irrotational flows, stream lines, path lines, 

streak lines, stream tubes, velocity and acceleration in fluid, circulation and vorticity, stream function and

potential function, Laplace equation, equipotential lines flow nets, uses and limitations,


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Dynamics of Fluid flow: Fluid Dynamics: Energies in flowing fluid, head, pressure, dynamic, static and total head, 

Control volume analysis of mass, momentum and energy, Equations of fluid dynamics: Differential equations of mass, 

energy and momentum (Euler's equation), Navier-Stokes equations (without proof) in rectangular and cylindrical co-ordinates,

Bernoulli's equation and its applications: Venturi and Orifice meters, Notches and Weirs (description only for notches and 

weirs). Hydraulic coefficients, Velocity measurements: Pitot tube and Pitot-static tube.

MODULE IV 

Pipe Flow: Viscous flow: Reynolds experiment to classify laminar and turbulent flows, significance of Reynolds number, 

critical Reynolds number, shear stress and velocity distribution in a pipe, law of fluid friction, head loss due to 

friction, Hagen Poiseuille equation. Turbulent flow: Darcy- Weisbach equation, Chezy's equation Moody's chart,

Major and minor energy losses, hydraulic gradient and total energy line, flow through long pipes, pipes in series, 

pipes in parallel, equivalent pipe, siphon, transmission of power through pipes, efficiency of transmission, Water hammer,

Cavitation.

--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Concept of Boundary Layer : Growth of boundary layer over a flat plate and definition of boundary layer thickness, 

displacement thickness, momentum thickness and energy thickness, laminar and turbulent boundary layers, laminar sub layer,

velocity profile, Von- Karman momentum integral equations for the boundary layers, calculation of drag, 

separation of boundary and methods of control.


MODULE VI 

Dimensional Analysis and Hydraulic similitude: Dimensional analysis, Buckingham's theorem, 

important dimensional numbers and their significance, geometric, Kinematic and dynamic similarity, model

studies. Froude, Reynold, Weber, Cauchy and Mach laws- Applications and limitations of model testing, simple problems only


Text Books: 

1. Balachandran.P, Engineering Fluid Mechanics, PHI,2012
2. A S Saleem, Fluid Mechanics, Fathima Books,2016

References Books:

1. Cengel, Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill Education India 2014
2. Bansal R. K., A Textbook of Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Laxmi Publications,2005
3. Modi P. N. and S. M. Seth, Hydraulics & Fluid Mechanics, S.B.H Publishers, New Delhi, 2002
4. Streeter V. L., E. B. Wylie and K. W. Bedford, Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, Delhi,2010.
5. Joseph Karz, Introductory Fluid Mechanics, Cambridge University press,2010
6. Fox R. W. and A. T. McDonald, Introduction to Fluid dynamics, 5/e, John Wiley and Sons,2009.
7. Shames I. H, Mechanics of Fluids, McGraw Hill, 1992.
8. White F.M., Fluid Mechanics, 6/e, Tata McGraw Hill, 2008
