ME210 METTALURGY AND MATERIALS ENGINEERING (3-0-0-3)


MODULE I

Earlier and present development of atomic structure; attributes of ionization energy and conductivity,

electronegativity and alloying; correlation of atomic radius to strength; electron configurations; electronic repulsion

Primary bonds: - characteristics of covalent, ionic and metallic bond: attributes of bond energy, cohesive force, density,

directional and non-directional and ductility.

properties based on atomic bonding:- attributes of deeper energy well and shallow energy well to melting temperature, 

coefficient of thermal expansion - attributes of modulus of elasticity in metal cutting process -Secondary bonds:- 

classification- hydrogen bond and anomalous behavior of ice float on water, application- atomic mass unit and specific 

heat, application. 

Crystallography:- Crystal, space lattice, unit cell- BCC, FCC, HCP structures - short and long range order - effects

of crystalline and amorphous structure on mechanical properties.

Coordination number and radius ratio; theoretical density; simple problems - Polymorphism and allotropy.

Miller Indices: - crystal plane and direction (brief review) - Attributes of miller indices for slip system, 

brittleness of BCC, HCP and ductility of FCC - Modes of plastic deformation: - Slip and twinning

Schmid's law, equation, critical resolved shear stress, correlation of slip system with plastic deformation in metals

and applications.

MODULE II

Mechanism of crystallization: Homogeneous and heterogeneous nuclei formation, under cooling, dendritic growth, 

grain boundary irregularity.

Effects of grain size, grain size distribution, grain shape, grain orientation on dislocation/strength and creep

resistance - Hall - Petch theory, simple problems

Classification of crystal imperfections: - types of dislocation - effect of point defects on mechanical properties - forest of

dislocation, role of surface defects on crack initiation.

Burgers vector -dislocation source, significance of Frank Read source in metals deformation - 

Correlation of dislocation density with strength and nano concept, applications.

Significance high and low angle grain boundaries on dislocation - driving force for grain growth and applications

during heat treatment.

Polishing and etching to determine the microstructure and grain size.

Fundamentals and crystal structure determination by X - ray diffraction, simple problems -SEM and TEM.

Diffusion in solids, Fick's laws, mechanisms, applications of diffusion in mechanical engineering, simple problems.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Phase diagrams: - Limitations of pure metals and need of alloying - classification of alloys, solid solutions, 

Hume Rothery`s rule - equilibrium diagram of common types of binary systems: five types.

Coring - lever rule and Gibb`s phase rule - Reactions: - monotectic, eutectic, eutectoid, peritectic, peritectoid.

Detailed discussion on Iron-Carbon equilibrium diagram with microstructure and properties changes in austenite,

ledeburite, ferrite, cementite, special features of martensite transformation, bainite, spheroidite etc.

Heat treatment: - Definition and necessity - TTT for a eutectoid iron-carbon alloy, CCT diagram, applications annealing, 

normalizing, hardening, spheroidizing.

Tempering:- austermpering, martempering and ausforming - Comparative study on ductility and strength with structure

of pearlite, bainite, spherodite, martensite, tempered martensite and ausforming.

Hardenability, Jominy end quench test, applicationsSurface hardening methods:- no change in surface composition methods :- 

Flame, induction, laser and electron beam hardening processes- change in surface composition methods :- carburizing and 

Nitriding; applications.



MODULE IV 

Types of Strengthening mechanisms: - work hardening, equation - precipitation strengthening and over ageingdispersion 

hardening.

Cold working: Detailed discussion on strain hardening;

recovery; re-rystallization, effect of stored energy; recrystallization temperature - hot working Bauschinger effect

and attributes in metal forming.

Alloy steels:- Effects of alloying elements on steel: dislocation movement, polymorphic transformation temperature, 

alpha and beta stabilizers, formation and stability of carbides, grain growth, displacement of the eutectoid point, 

retardation of the transformation rates, improvement in corrosion resistance, mechanical properties

Nickel steels, Chromium steels etc. - Enhancement of steel properties by adding alloying elements: - Molybdenum,

Nickel, Chromium, Vanadium, Tungsten, Cobalt, Silicon, Copper and Lead.

High speed steels:- Mo and W types, effect of different alloying elements in HSS

Cast irons: Classifications; grey, white, malleable and spheroidal graphite cast iron etc, composition, microstructure, 

properties and applications.

Principal Non ferrous Alloys: - Aluminum, Copper, Magnesium, Nickel, study of composition, properties, applications, 

reference shall be made to the phase diagrams whenever necessary.



--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Fatigue: - Stress cycles - Primary and secondary stress raisers - Characteristics of fatigue failure, fatigue tests, S-N

curve.

Factors affecting fatigue strength: stress concentration, size effect, surface roughness, change in surface properties,

surface residual stress.

Ways to improve fatigue life - effect of temperature on fatigue, thermal fatigue and its applications in metal cutting

Fracture: - Brittle and ductile fracture - Griffith theory of brittle fracture - Stress concentration, stress raiser - 

Effect of plastic deformation on crack propagation.

transgranular, intergranular fracture - Effect of impact loading on ductile material and its application in forging,

applications - Mechanism of fatigue failure.

Structural features of fatigue: - crack initiation, growth, propagation - Fracture toughness (definition only) - 

Ductile to brittle transition temperature (DBTT) in steels and structural changes during DBTT, applications.


MODULE VI 

Creep: - Creep curves - creep tests - Structural change:- deformation by slip, sub-grain formation, grain boundary sliding

Mechanism of creep deformation - threshold for creep, prevention against creep - Super plasticity: need and applications

Composites:- Need of development of composites geometrical and spatial Characteristics of particles - classification - 

fiber phase: - characteristics, classifications matrix phase:- functions - only need and characteristics of PMC, MMC, and 

CMC - applications of composites: aircraft applications, aerospace equipment and instrument structure, industrial applications 

of composites, marine applications, composites in the sporting goods industry, composite biomaterials.

Modern engineering materials: - only fundamentals, need, properties and applications of, intermetallics, maraging

steel, super alloys, Titanium - introduction to nuclear materials, smart materials and bio materials.

Ceramics:-coordination number and radius ratios- AX, AmXp, AmBmXp type structures - applications.


Text Books

1. Raghavan V, Material Science and Engineering, Prentice Hall,2004
2. Jose S and Mathew E V, Metallurgy and Materials Science, Pentagon, 2011

Reference

1 Anderson J.C. et.al., Material Science for Engineers,Chapman and Hall,1990
2 Clark and Varney, Physical metallurgy for Engineers, Van Nostrand,1964
3. Reed Hill E. Robert, Physical metallurgy principles, 4th Edn. Cengage Learning,2009
4. Avner H Sidney, Introduction to Physical Metallurgy, Tata McGraw Hill,2009
5. Callister William. D., Material Science and Engineering, John Wiley,2014
6. Dieter George E, Mechanical Metallurgy,Tata McGraw Hill,1976
7. Higgins R.A. - Engineering Metallurgy part - I - ELBS,1998
8. Myers Marc and Krishna Kumar Chawla, Mechanical behavior of materials, Cambridge
University press,2008
9. Van Vlack -Elements of Material Science - Addison Wesley,1989
10. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/113106032/1
11. http://www.myopencourses.com/subject/principles-of-physical-metallurgy-2
12. http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/materials-science-and-engineering/3-091sc-introduction-to 
solid-state-chemistry-fall-2010/syllabus/
13. http://www.msm.cam.ac.uk/teaching/partIA.php 