EC201	NETWORK THEORY (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Introduction to circuit variables and circuit elements, Review of Kirchhoff's Laws, Independent and dependent Sources, Source transformations

Network topology, Network graphs, Trees, Incidence matrix, Tie-set matrix and Cut-set matrix.

Solution methods applied to dc and phasor circuits: Mesh and node analysis of network containing independent and dependent sources.

MODULE II

Network theorems applied to dc and phasor circuits: Thevenin's theorem, Norton's theorem, Superposition theorem, Reciprocity theorem, Millman's theorem, Maximum power transfer theorem.

Laplace transform, properties Laplace Transforms and inverse Laplace transform of common functions, Important theorems: Time shifting theorem, Frequency shifting theorem, Time differentiation theorem, Time integration theorem, s domain differentiation theorem, s domain integration theorem, Initial value theorem, Final value theorem


--FIRST INTERNAL--

MODULE III

Partial Fraction expansions for inverse Laplace transforms, Solution of differential equations using Laplace transforms

Transformation of basic signals and circuits into s-domain

Transient analysis of RL, RC, and RLC networks with impulse, step, pulse, exponential and sinusoidal inputs Analysis of networks with transformed impedance and dependent sources.


MODULE IV

Network functions for the single port and two ports, properties of driving point and transfer functions, Poles and Zeros of network functions, Significance of Poles and Zeros

Time domain response from pole zero plot, Impulse Response

Network functions in the sinusoidal steady state, Magnitude and Phase response


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V

Parameters of two port network: impedance, admittance, transmission and hybrid parameters, Interrelationship among parameter sets

Series and parallel connections of two port networks

Reciprocal and Symmetrical two port network

Characteristic impedance, Image impedance and propagation constant (derivation not required)

MODULE VI

Resonance: Series resonance, bandwidth, Q factor and Selectivity, Parallel resonance

Coupled circuits: single tuned and double tuned circuits, dot convention, coefficient of coupling, Analysis of coupled circuits


Text Book:


1. Ravish R., Network Analysis and Synthesis, 2/e, McGraw-Hill, 2015.
2. Valkenburg V., Network Analysis, 3/e, PHI, 2011.


References: 


1. Sudhakar A,S. P. Shyammohan, Circuits and Networks- Analysis and Synthesis, 5/e, McGraw-Hill, 2015.
2. Choudhary R., Networks and Systems, 2/e, New Age International, 2013.
3. Franklin F. Kuo, Network Analysis and Synthesis, 2/e, Wiley India, 2012.
4. Pandey S. K., Fundamentals of Network Analysis and Synthesis, 1/e, S. Chand, 2012.
5. Edminister, Electric Circuits - Schaum's Outline Series, McGraw-Hill,2009.


