CS201 DISCRETE COMPUTATIONAL STRUCTURES (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Review of elementary set theory :

Algebra of sets - Ordered pairs and Cartesian products - Countable and Uncountable sets.

Relations :- Relations on sets -Types of relations and their properties - Relational matrix and the graph of a relation - Partitions - Equivalence relations - Partial ordering- Posets - Hasse diagrams - Meet and Join - Infimum and Supremum.

Functions :- Injective, Surjective and Bijective functions - Inverse of a function- Composition.


MODULE II

Review of Permutations and combinations, Principle of inclusion exclusion, Pigeon Hole Principle.

Recurrence Relations:

Introduction- Linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients- Homogeneous solutions - Particular solutions - Total solutions.

Algebraic systems:- Semigroups and monoids - Homomorphism, Subsemigroups and submonoids.


---FIRST INTERNAL EXAM---


MODULE III

Algebraic systems (contd...):-

Groups, definition and elementary properties, subgroups, Homomorphism and Isomorphism, Generators - Cyclic Groups, Cosets and Lagrange's Theorem.

Algebraic systems with two binary operations- rings, fields-subrings, ring homomorphism.



MODULE IV

Lattices and Boolean algebra :-

Lattices -Sublattices - Complete lattices - Bounded Lattices - Complemented Lattices - Distributive Lattices - Lattice Homomorphisms.

Boolean algebra - sub algebra, direct product and homomorphisms.


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAM---


MODULE V

Propositional Logic:- Propositions - Logical connectives - Truth tables.

Tautologies and contradictions - Contra positive - Logical equivalences and implications.

Rules of inference: Validity of arguments.


MODULE VI
Predicate Logic:- Predicates - Variables - Free and bound variables - Universal and Existential Quantifiers - Universe of discourse.

Logical equivalences and implications for quantified statements - Theory of inference : Validity of arguments.
Proof techniques: Mathematical induction and its variants - Proof by Contradiction - Proof by Counter Example - Proof by Contra positive.

Text Books

1. Trembly J.P and Manohar R, "Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications to Computer Science", Tata McGraw-Hill Pub.Co.Ltd, New Delhi, 2003.
2. Ralph. P. Grimaldi, "Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics: An Applied Introduction", 4/e, Pearson Education Asia, Delhi, 2002.

References:

1. Liu C. L., "Elements of Discrete Mathematics", 2/e, McGraw-Hill Int. editions, 1988.
2. Bernard Kolman, Robert C. Busby, Sharan Cutler Ross, "Discrete Mathematical Structures", Pearson Education Pvt Ltd., New Delhi, 2003
3. Kenneth H.Rosen, "Discrete Mathematics and its Applications", 5/e, Tata McGraw - Hill Pub. Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2003.
4. Richard Johnsonbaugh, "Discrete Mathematics", 5/e, Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2002.
5. Joe L Mott, Abraham Kandel, Theodore P Baker, "Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists and Mathematicians", 2/e, Prentice-Hall India, 2009.