EE206 MATERIAL SCIENCE  (3-0-0-3)


MODULE 1

Conducting Materials: Conductivity-  dependence on temperature and composition - Materials for electrical applications such as resistance, machines, solders etc. 
Semiconductor Materials: Concept, materials and properties-- Basic ideas of Compound semiconductors, amorphous and organic semiconductors- applications. 
Dielectrics: Introduction to Dielectric polarization and classification -Clausius Mosotti relation- Behavior of dielectric in static and alternating fields


MODULE 2

Insulating materials and classification- properties- Common insulating materials used in electrical apparatus-Inorganic,
organic, liquid and gaseous insulators- capacitor materials-  Electro-negative gases- properties and application of SF6 gas and its mixtures with nitrogen Ferro electricity.


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 3

Dielectric Breakdown: Mechanism of breakdown in gases, liquids and solids -basic theories including Townsend's criterion, Streamer mechanism, suspended particle theory, intrinsic breakdown, electro-mechanical breakdown- Factors influencing Ageing of insulators-Application of vacuum insulation- Breakdown in high vacuum-Basics of treatment and testing of transformer oil . 


MODULE 4

Magnetic Materials: Origin of permanent magnetic dipoles- Classification of magnetic materials -Curie-Weiss law- Properties and application of iron, alloys of iron- Hard and soft magnetic materials- Ferrites- Magnetic materials used in electrical machines, instruments and relays- 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 5

Superconductor Materials:-Basic Concept- types-characteristics-applications Solar Energy Materials: Photo thermal conversion- Solar selective coatings for enhanced solar thermal energy collection -Photovoltaic conversion - Solar cells -Silicon, Cadmium sulphide and Gallium arsenic - Organic solar cells. 


MODULE 6

Modern Techniques for materials studies: Optical microscopy - Electron microscopy - Photo electron spectroscopy - Atomic absorption spectroscopy - Introduction to Biomaterials and Nanomaterials 


Text Book: 
1. Dekker A.J : Electrical Engineering Materials, Prentice Hall of India 
2. G K Mithal : Electrical Engg Material Science. Khanna Publishers. 

References: 
1. Tareev, Electrical Engineerin Materials, Mir Publications 
2. Meinal A.B and Meinal M. P., Applied Solar Energy - An Introduction, Addisos Wesley 
3. Nasser E., Fundamentals of Gaseous Ionization and Plasma Electronics, Wiley Series in Plasma Physics, 1971 
4. Naidu M. S. and V. Kamaraju, High Voltage Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004 
5.  Indulkar O.S &Thiruvegadam S., An Introduction to electrical Engineering Materials, S. Chand  
6. Agnihotri O. P and Gupta B. K, Solar selective Surface, John wiley 
7. Seth. S.P and Gupta P. V, A Course in Electrical Engineering Materials, Dhanpathrai 