EE208 MEASUREMENTS AND INSTRUMENTATION(3-1-0-4)


MODULE 1

General principles of measurements - measurement system- measurement standards - characteristics - errors in measurement- calibration of meters- significance of IS standards of Instruments. Classification of meters - operating forces - essentials of indicating instruments - deflecting, damping, controlling torques. Ammeters and voltmeters - moving coil, moving iron, constructional details and operating, principles shunts and multipliers - extension of range. 


MODULE 2

Measurement of resistance: measurement of insulation resistance - loss of charge method, measurement of earth resistance. 
Measurement of power and energy: Dynamometer type wattmeter - 1-phase and 3-phase power measurement - 1-phase and 3-phase energy meters (induction type) - electronic energy meter, TOD meter. 


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 3

Introduction to high voltage and high current measurements: Measurement of high DC voltages - measurement of high AC voltages - electrostatic voltmeters - sphere gaps - DC Hall effect sensors - high current measurements. Study of Phasor Measurement Units (PMU). 
Current transformers and potential transformers - principle working, ratio and phase angle errors - numerical problems, Clamp on meters.


MODULE 4

Magnetic Measurements: Measurement of flux and permeability - flux meter - hall effect Gaussmeter - BH curve and permeability measurement - hysteresis measurement- ballistic galvanometer - principle- determination of BH curve - hysteresis loop. Lloyd Fisher square - measurement of iron losses Measurement of rotational speed using proximity sensors and optical sensors.


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 5

DC & AC potentiometers - General Principle -   calibration of ammeter, voltmeter and wattmeter using potentiometer. AC Bridges: Maxwell's bridge- Schering bridge and Wien's bridge Oscilloscopes - Basic principle of signal display - Block diagram and principle of operation of general purpose CRO - vertical deflecting system - horizontal deflection system - basic sweep generator - XY mode and Lissajous patterns - applications of CRO - dual trace oscilloscope. 
digital storage oscilloscope 


MODULE 6

Transducers - Definition and classification - common transducers for measurement of displacement, velocity, flow, liquid level, force,  pressure, strain and temperature - basic principles and working of LVDT, electromagnetic and ultrasonic flow meters, piezoelectricforce transducer, load cell, strain gauge- bridge configuration for four strain gauges, RTD, Thermistors, thermocouple,  Need for instrumentation system, data acquisition system.  


Text Book: 
1. Sawhney A.K., A course in Electrical and Electronic Measurements & instrumentation, DhanpatRai . 
2. J. B. Gupta, A course in Electrical & Electronic Measurement & Instrumentation., S K ataria& Sons 
3. Kalsi H. S., Electronic Instrumentation, 3/e, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2012 

References: 
1. Golding E.W., Electrical Measurements & Measuring Instruments, Wheeler Pub. 
2. Cooper W.D., Modern Electronics Instrumentation, Prentice Hall of India 
3. Stout M.B., Basic Electrical Measurements, Prentice Hall 
4. Oliver & Cage, Electronic Measurements & Instrumentation, McGraw Hill 
5. E.O Doebelin and D.N Manik, Doebelin's Measurements Systems, sixth edition, McGraw Hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
6. P.Purkait, B.Biswas, S.Das and C. Koley, Electrical and Electronics Measurements and Instrumentation, McGraw Hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd.,2013 