EE202 Synchronous and Induction Machines (3-1-0-4)


MODULE 1

Alternators - basic principle, constructional features of salient pole type and cylindrical type alternators, advantages of stationary armature, turbo-alternator. 
Armature winding - types of armature winding- single layer, double layer, full pitched and short pitched winding, slot angle, pitch factor and distribution factor - numerical problems.  
Effect of pitch factor on harmonics - advantages of short chorded winding, EMF Equation - numerical problems. Harmonics in generated EMF - suppression of harmonics. 


MODULE 2

Performance of an alternator - Causes for voltage drop in alternators -  armature resistance, armature leakage reactance - armature reaction, synchronous reactance, synchronous impedance, experimental determination - phasor diagram of a loaded alternator. 
Voltage regulation - EMF, MMF, ZPF and ASA methods - numerical problems. 


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 3


Theory of salient pole machine - Blondel's two reaction theory - direct axis and quadrature axis synchronous reactances - phasor diagram and determination of Xd and Xq by slip test. 
Parallel operation of alternators - necessity of parallel operation of alternators, methods of synchronisation- dark lamp method and bright lamp method, synchroscope,Synchronising current, synchronising power, synchronising torque.  Effects of changing excitation of alternators, load sharing of two alternators in parallel operation


MODULE 4

Synchronous motor - construction and principle of synchronous motor, methods of starting. Effects of excitation on armature current and power factor, v-curve and inverter v-curve, load angle, torque and power relationship, phasor diagram, losses and efficiency calculations.  
Three phase induction motor - constructional features, slip ring and cage types. Theory of induction motor with constant mutual flux, slip, phasor diagram, expression for mechanical power and torque, torque-slip characteristics, starting torque, full load and pull out torque, equivalent circuit.


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 5

Circle diagrams - tests on induction motors for determination of equivalent circuit and circle diagram. Cogging, crawling and noise production in cage motors - remedial measures.  Double cage induction motor -  principle, torque-slip curves.  
Starting of induction motors - types of starters - DOL starter, autotransformer starter, star-delta starter, rotor resistance starter - starting torque and starting current-numerical problems. Braking of induction motors - plugging, dynamic braking and regenerative braking (no numerical problems). Speed control - stator voltage control, V/f control, rotor resistance control. 


MODULE 6

Induction generator - principle of operation, grid connected and self excited operation, comparison of induction generator with synchronous generators. Synchronous induction motor -  principle of operation. 
Single-phase induction motor - double field revolving theory, equivalent circuit, torque slip curve.  Types of single phase induction motor - split phase, capacitor start, capacitor start and run types. Principle of shaded pole motor - applications. 


Text Book 
1. Bimbra P. S., Electrical Machinery, 7/e, Khanna Publishers, 2011. 
2. Nagrath J. and D. P. Kothari, Theory of AC Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006. 

Reference Books 
1. Say M. G., The Performance and Design of A. C. Machines, C B S Publishers, New Delhi, 2002. 
2. Fitzgerald A. E., C. Kingsley and S. Umans, Electric Machinery, 6/e, McGraw Hill, 2003. 
3. Langsdorf M. N., Theory of Alternating Current Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001. 
4. Deshpande M. V., Electrical Machines, Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, 2011. 
5. Charles I. Hubert, Electric Machines, Pearson, New Delhi 2007 
6. Theodore Wilde, Electrical Machines, Drives and Power System, Pearson Ed. Asia 2001