EE205 DC MACHINES AND TRANSFORMERS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE 1

Electromagnetic principles for Machines Electro dynamical equations and their solution - rotational motion system - mutually coupled coils - construction of DC machines - energy conversion in rotating electrical machines - eddy currents and eddy current losses - flux distribution curve in the airgap - armature windings - lap and wave windings - selection criteria - equalizer rings - dummy coils.


MODULE 2

DC generators - EMF equation - methods of excitation - separately and self excited - shunt, series, compound - armature reaction - effects of armature reaction - demagnetizing & cross magnetizing ampere-turns - compensating windings - interpoles - commutation - methods to improve commutation -  voltage build-up - no load 
characteristics - load characteristics - losses and efficiency - power flow diagram - parallel operation - applications of dc generators. 


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 3


DC motor - principle of operation - back emf - classification - torque equation - losses and efficiency - power flow diagram - performance characteristics of shunt, series and compound motors - starting of dc motors - necessity and types of starters - speed control - methods of speed control -  testing - Swinburne's test - Hopkinson's test - separation of losses - retardation test - applications of dc motors.


MODULE 4

Transformers - principle of operation - types and construction, core type and shell type construction, dry type transformers, cooling of transformers - ideal transformer - transformation ratio - dot convention - polarity test - practical transformer - kVA rating -  equivalent circuit - phasor diagram. 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 5

Transformer losses and efficiency - voltage regulation - OC & SC test - Sumpner's test - all day efficiency Autotransformer - saving of copper - current rating and kVA rating of autotransformers, parallel operation of single phase transformers,  necessary and desirable conditions of parallel operation, on load and off load tap changers. 


MODULE 6

3-phase transformer - 3-phase transformer connections - delta-delta, Y-delta , delta-Y , Y-delta, V-V - vector groupings Yy0, Dd0, Yd1, Yd11, Dy1, Dy11 - Scott connection - three winding transformer - tertiary winding - percentage and per unit impedance - parallel operation of three phase transformers.

Text Book 
1. Bimbra P. S., Electrical Machinery, 7/e, Khanna Publishers, 2011. 
2. Nagrath J. and D. P. Kothari, Theory of AC Machines, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006. 

Reference Books 
1. Fitzgerald A. E., C. Kingsley and S. Umans, Electric Machinery, 5/e, McGraw Hill, 1990. 
2. Langsdorf M. N., Theory of Alternating Current Machinery, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001. 
3. Abhijith Chakrabarti, Sudipta Debnath, Electrical Machines, McGraw Hill Education, New Delhi 2015. 
4. Deshpande M. V., Electrical Machines, Prentice Hall India, New Delhi, 2011. 
5. Theodore Wilde, Electrical Machines, Drives and Power System, Pearson Ed. Asia 2001. 