EE201 CIRCUITS AND NETWORKS (3-1-0-4)

MODULE 1

Network theorems - Superposition theorem - Thevenin's theorem - Norton's theorem - eciprocity Theorem - Maximum power transfer theorem - dc and ac steady state analysis - dependent and independent sources 

MODULE 2
Network topology - graph, tree, incidence matrix - properties of incidence matrix - fundamental cut sets - cut set matrix - tie sets - fundamental tie sets - tie set matrix - relationships among incidence matrix, cut set matrix & tie set matrix - Kirchoff's laws in terms of network topological matrices - formulation and solution of network equations using topological methods


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 3

Steady state and transient response - DC response & sinusoidal response of RL, RC and  RLC series circuits 


MODULE 4

Application of Laplace transform in transient analysis - RL, RC and RLC circuits (Series and Parallel circuits) - step  and sinusoidal response  
Transformed circuits - coupled circuits - dot convention - transform impedance/admittance of RLC circuits with mutual coupling -  mesh analysis and node analysis of transformed circuits - solution of transformed circuits including mutually coupled circuits in  s-domain 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION


MODULE 5

Two port networks - Z, Y , h, T parameters - relationship between parameter sets - condition for symmetry & reciprocity - interconnections of two port networks -  driving point and transfer immittance - T-pi transformation. 


MODULE 6

Network functions-Network synthesis-positive real functions and Hurwitz polynomial-synthesis of one port network with two kinds of elements-Foster form I&II-Cauer form I&II.

Text Book: 

1. Hayt and Kemmerly :Engineering Circuit Analysis, 8e, Mc Graw Hill Education , New Delhi, 2013. 
2. Sudhakar and Shyam Mohan- Circuits and Networks: Analysis and Synthesis, 5e, Mc Graw Hill Education,
 
References:  

1. Siskand C.S : Electrical Circuits ,McGraw Hill 
2. Joseph. A. Edminister: Theory and problems of Electric circuits, TMH  
3. D Roy Chaudhuri: Networks and Systems, New Age Publishers 
4. A . Chakrabarti : Circuit Theory (Analysis and Synthesis),Dhanpat Rai &Co 
5. Valkenberg : Network Analysis ,Prentice Hall of India 
6. B.R. Gupta: Network Systems and Analysis, S.Chand & Company lt
