ME206 FLUID MACHINERY (2-1-0-3)


MODULE I

Impact of jets: Introduction to hydrodynamic thrust of jet on a fixed and moving surface (flat and curve),- 

Series of vanes - work done and efficiency

Hydraulic Turbines : Impulse and Reaction Turbines - Degree of reaction - Pelton Wheel - Constructional features - 

Velocity triangles - Euler's equation - Speed ratio, jet ratio and work done , losses and efficiencies, 

design of Pelton wheel - Inward and outward flow reaction turbines- Francis Turbine - Constructional features - Velocity

triangles, work done and efficiencies

MODULE II

Axial flow turbine (Kaplan) Constructional features - Velocity triangles- work done and efficiencies - 

Characteristic curves of turbines - theory of draft tubes - surge tanks - Cavitation in turbines - Governing of turbines - 

Specific speed of turbine , Type Number- Characteristic curves, scale Laws - Unit speed - Unit discharge and unit power


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Rotary motion of liquids - free, forced and spiral vortex flows Rotodynamic pumps- centrifugal pump impeller types,-

velocity triangles-manometric head- work, efficiency and losses, H-Q characteristic, typical flow system characteristics, 

operating point of a pump. Cavitation in centrifugal pumps- NPSH required and availableType number-Pumps in series and 

parallel operations. Performance characteristics- Specific speed-Shape numbers - Impeller shapes based on shape numbers


MODULE IV 

Positive displacement pumps- reciprocating pump - Single acting and double acting- slip, negative slip and 

work required and efficiencyindicator diagram- acceleration head - effect of acceleration and friction on 

indicator diagram - speed calculation- Air vessels and their purposes, saving in work done to air vessels multi cylinder 

pumps. Multistage pumps-selection of pumps-pumping devices-hydraulic ram, Accumulator, Intensifier, Jet pumps, gear pumps,

vane pump and lobe pump.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Compressors: classification of compressors, reciprocating compressor-single stage compressor, equation for work with and

without clearance volume, efficiencies, multistage compressor, intercooler, free air delivered (FAD)


MODULE VI 

Centrifugal compressor-working, velocity diagram, work done, power required, width of blades of impeller and diffuser, 

isentropic efficiency, slip factor and pressure coefficient, surging and chocking.

Axial flow compressors:- working, velocity diagram, degree of reaction, performance. Roots blower, vane compressor, screw

compressor.



Text Books:

1. Som, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics and Fluid Machines ,McGraw Hill Education India 2011
2.  Bansal R. K., A Textbook of Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Laxmi Publications,2005.

Reference Books:

1. Cengel Y. A. and J. M. Cimbala, Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2013
2. Yahya S. M, Fans, Blower and Compressor, Tata McGraw Hill, 2005.
3. Shepherd D. G, Principles of Turbo Machinery, Macmillan, 1969.
4. Stepanoff A. J, Centrifugal and Axial Flow Pumps, John Wiley & Sons, 1991.
5. Rajput R. K, Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, S. Chand & Co.,2006.
6. Subramanya, Fluid mechanics and hydraulic machines, 1e McGraw Hill Education 
India,2010