ME202 ADVANCED MECHANICS OF SOLIDS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Introduction to stress analysis in elastic solids - stress at a point - stress tensor - 

stress components in rectangular and polar coordinate systems Cauchy's equations - stress transformation -

principal stresses and planes - hydrostatic and deviatoric stress components, octahedral shear stress - 

equations of equilibrium

Displacement field - engineering strain - strain tensor (basics only) - analogy between stress and strain tensors - 

strain-displacement relations (small-strain only) - compatibility conditions

MODULE II

Constitutive equations - generalized Hooke's law - equations for linear elastic isotropic solids - 

relation among elastic constants - Boundary conditions - St. Venant's principle for end effects - uniqueness theorem

2-D problems in elasticity - Plane stress and plane strain problems - stress compatibility equation - 

Airy's stress function and equation -polynomial method of solution - solution for bending of a cantilever with an end

load

--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Equations in polar coordinates (2D) - equilibrium equation, straindisplacement relations, conversion of Airy's equation and 

definition of stress function and stress components

Application of stress function to Lame's problem - stress concentration problem of a small hole in a large plate.

Axisymmetric problems - governing equations - application to thick cylinders, interference fit and rotating discs.

MODULE IV 

Unsymmetrical bending of straight beams - curved beams (rectangular c/s) - shear center - shear stresses in 

thin walled open sections

Strain energy of deformation - special cases of a body subjected to concentrated loads, moment or torque - 

reciprocal relation - strain energy of a bar subjected to axial force, shear force, bending moment and torque


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Maxwell reciprocal theorem - Castigliano's first and second theorems - virtual work principle - minimum potential energy 

theorem - complementary energy theorem

Torsion of non-circular bars: Saint Venant's theory - solutions for circular and elliptical cross-sections

MODULE VI 

Prandtl's method - solutions for circular and elliptical cross-sections membrane analogy - approximate solution methods for

non-circular shafts

Torsion of thin walled tubes, thin rectangular sections, rolled sections and multiply connected sections


Text Book: 

1. L. S. Sreenath, Advanced Mechanics of Solids, McGraw Hill, 2008
2. S. Jose, Advanced Mechanics of Materials, Pentagon Educational Services, 2013

References:
 
1 S. P. Timoshenko, J. N. Goodier, Theory of elasticity, McGraw Hill,1970
2 R.J. Atkin, and N. Fox, An introduction the theory of elasticity, Longman,1980
3. J. P. Den Hartog, Advanced Strength of Materials, McGraw Hill,1987
4. C. K. Wang, Applied Elasticity, McGraw Hill,1983
5. S. M. A. Kazimi, Solid Mechanics, McGraw Hill,2008
6. L. Govindaraju ,TG Sitharaman, Applied elasticity for Engineers, NPTEL
7. U. Saravanan, Advanced Solid Mechanics, NPTEL
8. www.solidmechanics.org/contents.htm - Free web book on Applied Mechanics of Solids by A.F. Bower.