ME204 THERMAL ENGINEERING (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Steam engineering- T- S diagram, Mollier chart, Steam cycles- Rankine cycle, Modified Rankine cycle, Relative efficiency, 

Improvement in steam cycles-Reheat, Regenerative and Binary vapor cycle Steam Boilers: Types of boilers -Cochran boiler, 

Babcock and Wilcox boiler, Benson boiler, La Mont boiler, Loeffler boiler, Velox boiler, Boiler Mountings and Accessories

Steam nozzles:-Types of nozzle- Velocity of steam, mass flow rate, critical pressure ratio and its significance, 

effect of friction, super saturated flow


MODULE II

Steam turbines: classification, compounding of turbines-pressure velocity variation, velocity diagrams, work done, 

efficiency, condition for maximum efficiency, multistage turbines-condition line, stage efficiency. 

Steam turbine performance-reheat factor, degree of reaction, cycles with reheating and regenerative heating, 

governing of turbines


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Internal combustion engines: classification of I.C. Engines- four stroke and two stroke I.C. Engines, Comparison of 

four stroke and two stroke Engine. Wankel Engine, Air standard cycle-Carnot cycle, Otto cycle; Diesel cycle, 

dual combustion cycle, comparison of Otto, diesel and dual combustion cycles. Stirling and Ericsson cycles, 

air standard efficiency, specific work output, work ratio, Actual cycle analysis, deviation of actual engine cycle from

ideal cycle. Rotary engines, Stratified charge engine , super charging of SI and CI Engines - turbo charging. 

Variable specific heats.

MODULE IV 

Performance Testing of I C Engines: Indicator diagram, mean effective pressure. Torque, Engine power- BHP, IHP. 

Engine efficiency - mechanical efficiency, volumetric efficiency, thermal efficiency and relative efficiency, 

Specific fuel consumption. Testing of I C enginesMorse test, Heat balance test and Retardation test Fuels and 

fuel combustion: flash point and fire point, calorific value, Fuels for SI and CI engine, Important qualities of SI and 

CI engine fuels, Rating of SI engine and CI engine fuels, Dopes, Additives, Gaseous fuels, LPG, CNG, Biogas, Producer gas. 

Analysis of fuel combustion-A/F ratio, equivalence ratio, minimum quantity of air, flue gas analysis, excess air


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Air pollution from I.C. Engine and its remedies: Pollutants from S.I. and C.I. Engines, Methods of emission control, 

alternative fuels for I.C.Engines; the blending of fuels, Bio fuels. Combustion in I.C. Engines: Combustion phenomena in 

S.I. engines; Ignition limits, stages of combustion in S.I. Engines, Ignition lag, velocity of flame propagation, 

auto ignition, detonation; effects of engine variables on detonation; theories of detonation, 

octane rating of fuels; pre-ignition; S.I. engine combustion chambers.

Stages of combustion in C.I. Engines; delay period; variables affecting delay period; knock in C.I. engines, 

Cetane rating; C.I. engine combustion chambers

MODULE VI 

Gas turbines: classification, Thermodynamic analysis of gas turbine cycles-open , closed and semi closed cycle; 

ideal working cycle- Brayton cycle-P-v and T-s diagram, thermal efficiency. Effect of compressor and turbine efficiencies. 

Optimum pressure ratio for maximum specific work output with and without considering machine efficiencies. Comparison of

gas turbine and IC engines, Analysis of open cycle gas turbine, Improvements of the basic gas turbine cycles-regeneration,

intercooling and reheating-cycle efficiency and work output-Condition for minimum compressor work and maximum turbine work. Combustion chambers for

gas turbines. pressure loss in combustion process and stability loop.


Text Books:

1. Rudramoorthy , Thermal Engineering, McGraw Hill Education India,2003
2. R.K Rajput, Thermal Engineering, Laxmi publications,2010

References Books:

1. V. Ganesan, Fundamentals of IC engines, Tata McGraw-Hill,2002
2. T.D. Eastop and A McConkey, Applied thermodynamics for engineering technology, Pearson education,1996
3. J.B.Heywood, I.C engine fundamentals. McGraw-Hill,2011
4. Gill, P.W., Smith, JR., J.H., and Ziurys, E.J Fundamentals of internal combustion engines Oxford and IBH,1959
5. Rathore, Thermal Engineering, McGraw Hill Education India, 2010

Steam Tables

6. R.S.Khurmi, Steam table with Mollier chart,S.Chand,2008