BT202 Bioprocess Heat Transfer (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Importance of heat transfer-various applications and principle and mechanism of the different 

modes of heat transfer viz. Conduction, Convection and Radiation. General heat conduction equation 

in various coordinates Formulation of heat transfer problems using different boundary conditions 

with and without generation. Solution of steady state one dimensional heat conduction with

heat generation.

Numerical problems

MODULE II

Lumped capacity analysis Chilling and freezing of food and biological materials

Thermal processing and sterilization of biological materials

Insulation materials and Fins ( detailed heat transfer analysis is not desired)

Fundamental considerations in convective heat transfer, significant parameters in convective heat 

transfer such as momentum diffusivity, thermal diffusivity, Prandtl number, Nusselt number, 

dimensional analysis of convective heat transfer-Natural and Forced convection


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Boundary layer concept LMTD, LMTD correction factor, 

Individual heat transfer coefficients, relationship between individual and overall 

heat transfer coefficients 

Dimensional analysis Buckingham’s pi theorem

Empirical correlations

Numerical problems


MODULE IV 

Boiling heat transfer

Regimes of pool boiling of saturated liquid

Correlations for estimating the boiling heat transfer coefficients.

Types of condensation

Nusselt’s equation with derivation

Correlations for determination of condensing coefficients


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Detailed classification of heat exchangers

Elementary design

Use of plate-heat exchangers for biological fluids.

Types of evaporators and theory

Multiple effect evaporators

Calculations on single effect evaporators

Heat transfer through extended surfaces.


MODULE VI 

Energy changes in living systems - free energy, enthalpy, entropy and their relationship, free 

energy changes in biochemical reactions such as hydrolysis of ATP and other high energy phosphate 

compounds, application of calorimetry to gain basic understanding of energy flow in a biological

system, Effect pH and concentration on net free energy changes


References Books:

1.Dutta B. K., Heat Transfer- Principles and Applications, Prentice Hall of India, 2000.
2.Holman J. P., Heat Transfer, McGraw Hill, 1992.
3.Coulson J. M. and J. F. Richardson, Chemical Engineering, Vol. 1, Pergamon Press, 1999.
4.K. A. Gavhane, Hear Transfer, Nirali Prakashan, 2008
5.Doran P. M., Bioprocess Engineering Principles, 2/e, Elsevier- Academic Press, 2013.


