BT204 Industrial Bioprocessing (4-0-0-4)


MODULE I

A review of industrial fermentation and enzymatic processes and products - Role of a bioprocess 

engineer in bioprocess industry- Outline of the various unit operations involved in

the upstream and downstream operations of a bioprocess plant-Process flow sheeting- Isolation, 

preservation and improvement of industrial strains- Recombinant DNA technology for overproduction 

of primary and secondary metabolites. Regulation of enzyme activity and synthesis, Catabolite and 

phosphate regulation.


MODULE II

Market Economics relating to modem Industrial Biotechnology in India - Capital cost estimation - 

operating cost estimation - profitability analysis - GMP and cGMP - Utilities in a bioprocess 

plant - Energy conservation and audit in a bioprocess plant.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

General purification methods for enzymes - Biosynthesis by microorganism - important engineering 

problems involved in the manufacture of the following products with flow diagram - 

Organic acids: Citric acid, lactic acid, Gluconic acid, acetic acid- Amino acids: Glutamic acid, 

Lysine, Aspartic acid- Alcohols :acetone, ethanol and butanol


MODULE IV 

Secondary metabolites: Production of secondary metabolites of Industrial Importance - antibiotics: 

penicillin and cephalosporin - aminoglycosides: streptomycin, kanamycin -

Aromatic antibiotics: chlorcphenicol, griseofulvin - Vitamins: B12, Riboflavin


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Application of enzymes in - Starches, Sugars and Syrups Industry - Fruit and Vegetable Juice 

manufacture - Brewing, Textiles and Laundry Detergents, Pulp and Paper industry -Tanning Industry.


MODULE VI 

Manufacture of human insulin - Interferon, Erythropoietin, Streptokinase, Interleukin, Blood 

factor VIII - Hepatitis B Vaccine - Vitamin B12 - Monoclonal antibodies for therapeutics, Xanthan 

gum and PHB

References Books:

1. Michael L Schuler and Fikret Kargi, Bioprocess Engineering Basic Concepts, Prentice Hall
PTR, 2002.
2. S. C. Prescott, C. G. Dunn, Industrial Microbiology, Agrobios, 2005.
3. K. Buchholz, V. Kasche, U.T. Bornscheuer, Biocatalysts and Enzyme Technology, WILEY-
VCH, 2005.
4. Moo-Young. M, Comprehensive Biotechnology, Volumes 1-3, Pergamon Press (Oxford ),
2004.
5. Ratledge, Colin and Bjorn Kristiansen, Basic Biotechnology, 2/e, Cambridge University Press,
2001.


