BT208 Principles of Biochemistry (3-0-0-3)


MODULE I

Introduction to biochemistry and biomolecules, biochemistry of water, acid and base chemistry, 

importance of buffers in cellular mechanism and pH regulation, Henderson - Hasselbalch equation, 

Membrane transport mechanisms.


MODULE II

Role of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids in cellular functions; Chemical 

Properties and reactions of carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Introduction to enzymes, Properties of enzymes, Introduction to enzyme kinetics, Michaelis - 

Menten kinetics, Concepts of ligand - enzyme interactions, classification, reaction rates,

activation energy; Mechanism of action of selected enzymes and co enzymes.


MODULE IV 

Urea cycle, biosynthetic pathways of selected amino acids; biosynthesis of fatty acids; Control of 

level of glucose in blood, hormonal integration of metabolism, signal transduction cascades of 

glucose mobilization, genetic disorders of metabolism.



--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Carbohydrates- simple sugars to polysaccharides, complex polymers and glycoproteins; fatty acids 

structure and chemistry, lipids, cholesterol, steroids; amino acids structure, nomenclature; ploy 

nucleotides - DNA, RNA and their primary, secondary, tertiary structure, chemical synthesis,

DNA replication.


MODULE VI 

Cellular energy requirement for vital functions, vitamins, energy conversions, techniques used in 

the study of metabolism. Transcription, RNA processing, translational events in protein synthesis; 

Glycolysis and TCA cycle, Proton pump, mitochondrial shuttles. Electron transport chain,

chemiosmotic coupling.



References Books:

1. Lehninger A. L, Nelson D.L and M.M. Cox, Principles of Biochemistry, Palgrave MacMillan,
2002.
2. Stryer L, Berg J.M and Tymoczko J.L, Biochemistry, Fifth edition, W.H. Freeman and Co.,
2002.
3. Zubay G, Biochemistry, Fourth edition, McGraw Hill Publishers, 1999.
4. Donald Voet and Judith G. Voet., Biochemistry, John Wiley and Sons, 2011.
5.
Charles M. Grisham, Biochemistry, Cengage Learning, 2016.


