BT206 C++ Programming (3-0-0-3)


MODULE I

Basic information on computers, Algorithm, flowchart, pseudo code, program development steps, 

programming languages, Character set, tokens, data types, variables, operators, expressions, Input 

and Output, directory, header files, return, computer hardware and software.


MODULE II

Simple algorithms, flowcharts and programs, Control statements - if, switch statements with sample 

programs, Looping statements - for, while, do-while statements, Jump statements - break, continue, 

goto and exit (), simple programs


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Arrays - single and multi-dimensional arrays, initializing array elements, Character arrays, 

string functions. Functions - Arguments, returning function results, call by value and call

by reference, functions calling functions, functions and arrays - Global variables, automatic, 

static and register variables, pointer, pointers and arrays, recursive functions.


MODULE IV 

Structures - functions and structures - Arrays of structures - structures within structures, 

Structures containing arrays.

Files - Input and Output, Pointer and structure


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Basic concepts of object oriented programming, advantages of object oriented programming, 

Definition of a class, members of a class, data members and member functions,

Declaration of objects, array of objects, Constructors and Destructors, Inheritance - Simple 

programs.


MODULE VI 

New data type creation, new header file creation, Searching - Linear search methods, sorting - 

Bubble sort, data structures - linked lists, stacks and queues in C++



References Books:

1. Hubbard J. R., Schaum's Outline of Programming with C++, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
2. Lafore R., Object-Oriented Programming in C++, SAMS Publishing, 2001.
3. Kamthane A. M., Object Oriented programming with ANSI and TURBO C++, Pearson
Education, 2006.
4. Balaguruswamy E., Object Oriented programming with C++, Tata McGraw Hill, 2013.
5. D'Orazio, T. B, Programming in C++: Lessons and Applications, McGraw-Hill, 2003.
