
BE100  ENGINEERING MECHANICS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Statics: Fundamental concepts and laws of mechanics - Rigid body - Principle of transmissibility of forces 

Coplanar force systems - Moment of a force - Principle of moments 

Resultant of force and couple system 

Equilibrium of rigid body - Free body diagram - Conditions of equilibrium in two dimensions - Two force and three force members. 


MODULE II

Types of supports - Problems involving point loads and uniformly distributed loads only. 

Force systems in space - Degrees of freedom - Free body diagram - Equations of equilibrium - Simple resultant and Equilibrium problems. 


---FIRST INTERNAL EXAM ---


MODULE III

Properties of planar surfaces - Centroid and second moment of area (Derivations not required) - Parallel and perpendicular axis theorem - Centroid and Moment of Inertia of composite area. 

Polar Moment of Inertia - Radius of gyration - Mass moment of inertia of cylinder and thin disc (No derivations required). 

Product of inertia - Principal Moment of Inertia (conceptual level). 

Theorems of Pappus and Guldinus. 


MODULE IV 

Friction - Characteristics of dry friction - Problems involving friction of ladder, wedges and connected bodies. 

Definition of work and virtual work - Principle of virtual work for a system of connection bodies - Problems on determinate beams only. 


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAM ----


MODULE V

Dynamics: Rectangular and Cylindrical co-ordinate system 

Combined motion of rotation and translation - Concept of instantaneous centre - Motion of connecting rod of piston and crank of a reciprocating pump. 

Rectilinear translation - Newton's second law - D'Alembert's Principle  - Application to connected bodies (Problems on motion of lift only). 


MODULE VI

Mechanical vibrations - Free and forced vibration - Degree of freedom. 

Simple harmonic motion - Spring-mass model - Period - Stiffness - Frequency - Simple numerical problems of single degree of freedom.


Text Books: 

1. Shames, I. H., Engineering Mechanics - Statics and Dynamics, Pearson Prentice 
2. Timoshenko, S. & Young D. H., Engineering Mechanics, McGraw Hill 


References Books: 

1. Babu, J., Engineering Mechanics, Pearson Prentice Hall 
2. Beer and Johnson, Vector Mechanics for Engineers - Statics and Dynamics, Tata McGraw 
Hill Publishing Company Limited 
3. Benjamin J., Engineering Mechanics, Pentex Book Publishers and Distributors 
4. Bhavikkatti, S. S., Engineering Mechanics, New Age International Publishers 
5. Hibbeler, R. C., Engineering Mechanics: Statics and Dynamics. Pearson Prentice Hall 
6. Kumar, K. L., Engineering Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Limited 
7. Merriam J. L. and Kraige L. G., Engineering Mechanics -Vol. I and II, John Wiley 
8. Rajasekaran S. and Sankarasubramanian, G., Engineering Mechanics, Vikas Publishing 
House Private Limited 
9. Tayal, A. K., Engineering Mechanics- Statics and Dynamics, Umesh Publications.
