EC100 - BASICS OF ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  (2-1-0-3)

MODULE 1


Evolution of Electronics, Impact of Electronics in industry and in society. Resistors, Capacitors: types, specifications. Standard values, marking, colour coding. Inductors and Transformers: types, specifications, Principle of working. Electro mechanical components: relays and contactors.


MODULE 2


PN Junction diode: Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, Principle of operation, V-I characteristics, principle of working of Zener diode, Photo diode, LED and Solar cell. 
Bipolar Junction Transistors: PNP and NPN structures, Principle of operation, input and output characteristics of common emitter configuration (npn only). 


MODULE 3


Rectifiers and power supplies: Block diagram description of a dc power supply ,Half wave and full wave (including bridge) rectifier, capacitor filter, working of simple zener voltage regulator.  

Amplifiers and Oscillators: Circuit diagram and working of common emitter amplifier, Block diagram of Public Address system, concepts of feedback, working principles of oscillators, circuit diagram & working of RC phase shift oscillator. 

MODULE 4


Analogue Integrated circuits: Functional block diagram of operational amplifier, ideal operational amplifier, inverting and non-inverting Amplifier. 

Digital ICs: Logic Gates. 

Electronic Instrumentation: Principle and block diagram of digital multimeter, digital storage oscilloscope, and function generator. 


MODULE 5


Radio communication: principle of AM & FM, frequency bands used for various communication systems, block diagram of super heterodyne receiver. 
 
Satellite communication: concept of geo-stationary Satellite system. 

MODULE 6


Mobile communication: basic principles of cellular communications, concepts of cells, frequency reuse. 

Optical communication: block diagram of the optical communication system, principle of light transmission through fiber, advantages of optical communication systems. 

Entertainment Electronics Technology: Basic principles and block diagram of cable TV, CCTV, DTH system.


References Books:


1. Bell, D. A., Electronic Devices and Circuits, Oxford University Press
2. Boylested, R. L. and Nashelsky, L., Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory, Pearson Education
3. Frenzel, L. E., Principles of Electronic Communication Systems, Mc Graw Hill
4. Kennedy, G. and Davis, B., Electronic Communication Systems, Mc Graw Hill
5. Tomasy, W., Advanced Electronic Communication system, PHI Publishers