PH100         ENGINEERING PHYSICS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Harmonic Oscillations: Differential equation of damped harmonic oscillation, forced harmonic oscillation and their solutions- Resonance, Q factor, Sharpness of resonance- LCR circuit as an electrical analogue of Mechanical Oscillator (Qualitative) 

Waves: One dimensional wave - differential equation and solution. Three dimensional waves - Differential equation & its solution. (No derivation) Transverse vibrations of a stretched string. 


MODULE II

Interference: Coherence. Interference in thin films and wedge shaped films (Reflected system) Newton's rings-measurement of wavelength and refractive index of liquid Interference filters. Antireflection coating.

Diffraction Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction. Fraunhofer diffraction at a single slit. Plane transmission grating. Grating equation - measurment of wavelength. Rayleigh's criterion for resolution of grating- Resolving power and dispersive power of grating. 


-----FIRST INTERNAL EXAM----- 


MODULE III

Polarization of Light: Types of polarized light. Double refraction. Nicol Prism. Quarter wave plate and half wave plate. Production and detection of circularly and elliptically polarized light. Induced birefringence- Kerr Cell - Polaroid & applications. 

Superconductivity: Superconducting phenomena. Meissner effect. Type-I and Type-II superconductors. BCS theory (qualitative). High temperature 
superconductors - Josephson Junction - SQUID- Applications of superconductors.


MODULE IV

Quantum Mechanics: Uncertainty principle and its applications- formulation of Time dependent and Time independent Schrodinger equations- physical meaning of wave function- Energy and momentum Operators-Eigen values and functions- One dimensional infinite square well potential .Quantum mechanical Tunnelling (Qualitative) 

Statistical Mechanics: Macrostates and Microstates. Phase space. Basic postulates of Maxwell- Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi Dirac 
statistics. Distribution equations in the three cases (no derivation). Fermi Level and its significance. 


--SECOND INTERNAL EXAM --


MODULE V

Acoustics: Intensity of sound- Loudness-Absorption coefficient - Reverberation and reverberation time- Significance of reverberation time- Sabine's formula (No derivation) -Factors affecting acoustics of a building. 

Ultrasonics: Production of ultrasonic waves - Magnetostriction effect and 
Piezoelectric effect - Magnetostriction oscillator and Piezoelectric oscillator - Detection of ultrasonics - Thermal and piezoelectric methods- Applications of ultrasonics - NDT and medical. 


MODULE VI

Laser: Properties of Lasers, absorption, spontaneous and stimulated emissions, Population inversion, Einstein's coefficients, Working principle of laser,Optial resonant cavity. Ruby Laser, Helium-Neon Laser, Semiconductor Laser (qualitative). Applications of laser, holography 
(Recording and reconstruction) 

Photonics: Basics of solid state lighting - LED - Photodetectors - photo voltaic cell, junction & avalanche photo diodes, photo transistors, thermal detectors, Solar cells- I-V characteristics - Optic fibre-Principle of propagation-numerical aperture-optic communication system (block diagram) - Industrial, medical and technological applications of optical fibre. Fibre optic sensors - Basics of Intensity modulated and phase modulated sensors.



References: 

1. Aruldhas, G., Engineering Physics, PHI Ltd. 
2. Beiser, A., Concepts of Modern Physics, McGraw Hill India Ltd. 
3. Bhattacharya and Tandon, Engineering Physics , Oxford India 
4. Brijlal and Subramanyam, A Text Book of Optics, S. Chand & Co. 
5. Dominic and Nahari, A Text Book of Engineering Physics, Owl Books Publishers
6. Hecht, E., Optics, Pearson Education 
7. Mehta, N., Applied Physics for Engineers, PHI Ltd 
8. Palais, J. C., Fiber Optic Communications, Pearson Education 
9. Pandey, B. K. and Chathurvedi, S., Engineering Physics, Cengage Learning 
10. Philip, J., A Text Book of Engineering Physics, Educational Publishers 
11. Premlet, B., Engineering Physics, Mc GrawHill India Ltd 
12. Sarin, A. and Rewal, A., Engineering Physics, Wiley India Pvt Ltd 
13. Sears and Zemansky, University Physics , Pearson 
14. Vasudeva, A. S., A Text Book of Engineering Physics, S. Chand & Co
