EE100 - BASICS OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING  (2-1-0-3)


MODULE 1


Elementary concepts of electric circuits: Kirchhoff's laws, constant voltage and current sources,  Problems
Formation of network equations by node voltage and mesh current methods. Matrix representation - solution of network equations by matrix methods,
 star-delta conversion  (resistive networks only-derivation is not needed)- problems.


MODULE 2


Magnetic circuits: MMF, field strength, flux density, reluctance(definition only), comparison between electric and magnetic circuits
Energy stored in magnetic circuits. magnetic circuits with air gap Numerical problems on series magnetic circuits 
Electromagnetic Induction: Faraday's laws, lenz's laws- statically induced and dynamically induced emfs-self inductance and mutual inductance, coefficient of coupling (derivation not needed)


MODULE 3


Alternating Current fundamentals: Generation of alternating voltages-waveforms, frequency, period, average , RMS values and form factor of periodic waveform(pure sinusoidal)-
AC Circuits: Phasor representation of alternating quantities-rectangular and polar representation
Analysis of simple AC circuits: concept of impedance, power and power factor in ac circuits-active, reactive and apparent power 
solution of RL,RC and RLC series circuits-Numerical problems Three phase systems: Generation of three phase voltages-advantages of three phase systems, star and delta connection (balanced only), relation between line and phase voltages, line and phase currents 
three phase power measurement by two wattmeter method (derivation is not required) - Numerical problems 

MODULE 4

Generation of power: Block schematic representation of generating stations- hydroelectric power plants 
Block schematic representation of Thermal and nuclear power plants 
Renewable energy sources: solar, wind, tidal and geothermal (Block diagram and working only- No Problems) 

Power transmission: Typical electrical power transmission scheme-need for high voltage transmission-(Derivation is not needed,  No Problems)
Power Distribution: substation equipments, primary and secondary transmission and distribution systems- feeder, service mains


MODULE 5

Electric Machines: DC Generator and Motor-Construction-working principle- Back EMF 

Types of motor-shunt, series, compound (short and long)-principle of operation of dc motor, applications-numerical  problems ( voltage -current relations only) 

Transformer: Construction of single phase and three phase Transformers (core type only)-EMF equation and related  numerical problems  

Losses and efficiency of transformer for full load -numerical problems (no equivalent circuit) 


MODULE 6


AC Motors: Three phase induction motor-squirrel cage and slip ring induction motor  

Working principle-synchronous speed, slip and related numerical problems. (no equivalent circuit) 

AC Motors: Construction, principles of operation of single phase induction motor (no equivalent circuit) 

Starting methods in single phase induction motors -split phase and capacitor start References 

Books:


1. Bhattacharya, S. K., Basic Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Pearson
2. Bird, J., Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group
3. Del Toro, V., Electrical Engineering Fundamentals, Prentice Hall of India.
4. Hayt, W. H., Kemmerly, J. E., and Durbin, S. M., Engineering Circuit Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill
5. Hughes, Electrical and Electronic Technology, Pearson Education
6. Mehta, V. K. and Mehta, R., Basic Electrical Engineering, S. Chand Publishing
7. Parker and Smith, Problems in Electrical Engineering, CBS Publishers and Distributors
8. Sudhakar and Syam Mohan, Circuits and Networks Analysis and Synthesis, Tata McGraw Hill
9. Suresh Kumar, K. S, Electric Circuits and Networks, Pearson Education
