BE102 DESIGN AND ENGINEERING (2-0-2-3)


MODULE 1

Design and its objectives; Design constraints, Design functions, Design means and Design from; Role of Science, Engineering and Technology in design; Engineering as a business proposition; Functional and Strength Designs. Design form, function and strength; 
How to initiate creative designs? Initiating the thinking process for designing a product of daily use. Need
identification; Problem Statement; Market survey-customer requirements; Design attributes and objectives; Ideation; Brain storming approaches;
arriving at solutions; Closing on to the Design needs.
An Exercise in the process of design initiation. A simple problem is to be taken up to examine different solutions-Ceiling fan? Group Presentation and discussion.


MODULE 2

Design process- Different stages in design and their significance; Defining the design space; Analogies and
"thinking outside of the box"; Quality function deployment-meeting what the customer wants; Evaluation and choosing of a design.
Design Communication; Realization of the concept into a configuration, drawing and model. Concept of "Complex is Simple". Design for function and strength. Design detailing- Material selection, Design visualisation- Solid modelling; Detailed 2D drawings; Tolerancing; Use of standard items in design; Research needs in design; Energy needs of the design, both in its realization and in the applications.
An exercise in the detailed design of two products (Stapler/ door/clock)


MODULE 3

Prototyping- rapid prototyping; testing and evaluation of design; Design modifications; Freezing the design; Cost analysis.
Engineering the design - From prototype to product. Planning; Scheduling; Supply chains; inventory; handling;
manufacturing/construction operations; storage; packaging; shipping; marketing; feed-back on design.
List out the standards organizations. Prepare a list of standard items used in any engineering specialization. Develop any design with over 50% standard items as parts.


MODULE 4

Design for "X"; covering quality, reliability, safety, manufacturing/construction, assembly, maintenance, logistics, handling; disassembly; recycling; re-engineering etc.
List out the design requirements(x) for designing a rocket shell of 3 meter diameter and 8 meter length. Design mineral water bottles that could be packed compactly for transportation.


MODULE 5

Product centred and user centred design. Product centred attributes and user centred attributes. Bringing the two
closer. Example: Smart phone. Aesthetics and ergonomics.
 Value engineering, Concurrent engineering, Reverse engineering in design; Culture based design; Architectural designs; Motifs and cultural background; Tradition and design;
Study the evolution of Wet grinders; Printed motifs; Role of colours in design. Make sharp corners and change them to smooth curves-
check the acceptance. Examine the possibility of value addition for an existing product.


MODULE 6

Modular design; Design optimization; Intelligent and autonomous products; User interfaces; communication
between products; autonomous products; internet of things; human psychology and the advanced products.
Design as a marketing tool; Intellectual Property rights -Trade secret; patent; copy-right; trademarks; product liability.
Group presentation of any such products covering all aspects that could make or mar it


References Books:

1. Balmer, R. T., Keat, W. D., Wise, G., and Kosky, P., Exploring Engineering, Third Edition: An Introduction to Engineering and Design -  [Part 3 - Chapters 17 to 27], ISBN-
13: 978-0124158917 ISBN-10: 0124158919
2. Dym, C. L., Little, P. and Orwin, E. J., Engineering Design - A Project based introduction - Wiley, ISBN-978-1-118-32458-5
3. Eastman, C. M. (Ed.), Design for X Concurrent engineering imperatives, 1996, XI, 489 p. ISBN 978-94-011-3985-4 Springer
4. Haik, Y. And Shahin, M. T., Engineering Design Process, Cengage Learning, ISBN-13: 978-0-495-66816-9
5. Pahl, G., Beitz, W., Feldhusen, J. and Grote, K. H., Engineering Design: A Systematic


Web pages:
1. E-Book (Free download): http://opim.wharton.upenn.edu/~ulrich/designbook.html
2. http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/wmg/ftmsc/modules/modulelist/peuss/designforx/design_for_x_notes_section_5.pdf

