BE101-02 INTRODUCTION TO MECHANICAL ENGINEERING SCIENCE (2-1-0-3)


MODULE 1

Thermodynamics: Nature and scope of thermodynamics; Basic concepts ; Laws of thermodynamics- Discovery, Significance & Applications; Qualitative ideas on Entropy, Available energy, Irreversibility, Clausius Inequality, Principle of increase of entropy & Carnot engine; Limitations of Thermodynamics; Sources of power; history of power production; power production in the future. 


MODULE 2

Thermal Engineering: Historical development of steam engine, steam turbines, gas turbines and hydraulic turbines; Principle of turbomachinery; History of IC engines; two stroke and four stroke engines-working, applications; Air compressors- types and uses; Principles of Rocket propulsion, chemical rockets, Indian space programme.
 

----FIRST INTERNAL EXAM ----


MODULE 3

Refrigeration & Air Conditioning: History & scope of refrigeration; applications of refrigeration; Food preservation, refrigerated storage; applications in chemical and process industries; special applications; Air conditioning- Principles & systems; scope of air conditioning; Psychrometric properties of air; Human comfort; comfort standards. 


MODULE 4

Automobile & Aeronautical Engineering: Introduction to an Automobile; history of the automobile; Indian Automobiles; Types of automobiles; Major components and their functions; Manufacturers of motor vehicles in India; Fundamentals of aerodynamics; drag force and lift force; jet engines types and applications.


---SECOND INTERNAL EXAM---


MODULE 5

Engineering Materials: Introduction and history of materials; Basic crystallography; metals, alloys, composites,ceramics, polymers;mechanical properties and testing of engineering materials. 


MODULE 6

Manufacturing Engineering: Methods of manufacturing; casting, forging, rolling, extrusion; maching operations - turning,milling, drilling, grinding, shaping, planing; Joining operations- soldering,brazing, & welding; Introduction to CNC machines(elementary idea only); examples of typical products manufactured by above methods.


References Books: 

1. Dossat, R. J., Principles of Refrigeration, PHI 
2. Heywood, J., Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, McGraw Hill Publishers 
3. Holman, J. P., Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill Co. 
4. Jain, K. K. and Asthana, R. B., Automobile Engineering, TTTI Bhopal 
5. Jonathan Wickert, Introduction to Mechanical Engineering, Cengage Learning
6. Kalpakjian, S. and Schmid, S. R., Manufacturing Processes for Engineering Materials, 
Pearson education 
7. Maines, R., Landmarks in Mechanical Engineering, ASME 
8. Peng, W. W., Principles of Turbomachinery, John Wiley & Sons 
9. Pita, E. G., Air Conditioning Principles & Systems, PHI 
10. Spalding, D. B. and Cole, E. H., Engineering Thermodynamics, ELBS & Edward Arnold 
(Pub) Ltd. 
11. Stone, R. and Ball, T. K., Automotive Engineering Fundamentals, SAE International 
12. Sutton, G. P. and Ross, D. M., Rocket Propulsion Elements, John Wiley & Sons 
13. Von Karman, T., Aerodynamics: Selected Topics in the Light of Their Historical 
Development, Courier Corporation 
14. Online course on Refrigeration & Air conditioning, IIT Kharagpur www.nptel.ac.in