ME100 - BASICS OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING  (2-1-0-3)

MODULE 1


Thermodynamics: Laws of Thermodynamics, significance and applications of laws of thermodynamics; entropy Ideal and real gas equations; Analysis of Carnot cycle, Otto cycle , Diesel cycle; Efficiency of these cycles.


MODULE 2


Energy conversion devices: Boilers, Steam turbines, Gas turbiness; Working principle of two stroke and four stroke I.C. Engines (SI and CI), Fuels, CRDI, MPFI, Hybrid Engines, Reciprocating pumps and centrifugal pumps, and hydraulic turbines(Elementary ideas only).

MODULE 3


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning: Vapour compression refrigeration systems, Heat Pump, COP, Study of household refrigerator, Energy
Efficiency Rating, Psychrometry, Psychrometric processes, window air conditioner, split air conditioner. 
Refrigerants and their impact on environment.


MODULE 4

Automobiles and Power Transmission Devices, Different types of automobiles, types of power units in automobiles; major components and their functions(brief descriptions only); 
 Belts and belt drives; Chain drive; Rope drive; Gears and gear trains; friction clutch (cone and single plate), brakes (types and applications only).

MODULE 5


Materials and manufacturing processes: Engineering materials, Classification, properties, Alloys and their Applications; Casting, Sheet
metal forming, Sheet metal cutting, Forging, Rolling, Extrusion, Metal joining processes - soldering, brazing and welding; powder metallurgy.(Elementary ideas only).


MODULE 6

Machine Tools (Basic elements, Working principle and types of operations) Lathe , Drilling Machine 
 Shaper, planer, slotter, Milling Machine, Grinding machine; Introduction CNC machines.


References Books:

1. Balachandran, Basic Mechanical Engineering, Owl Books
2. Benjamin, J., Basic Mechanical Engineering, Pentex Books
3. Clifford, M., Simmons, K. and Shipway, P., An Introduction to Mechanical Engineering   Part I - CRC Press
4. Crouse, Automobile Engineering, Tata Mc-Graw-Hill, New Delhi
5. Gill, Smith and Zuirys, Fundamentals of IC Engines, Oxford and IBH publishing company Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi. Crouse, Automobile Engineering, Tata Mc-Graw-Hill, New Delhi.
6. Nag, P. K., Basic and Applied Thermodynamics, Tata McGraw-Hill
7. Pravin Kumar, Basic Mechanical Engineering
8. Roy and Choudhary, Elements of Mechanical Engineering, Media Promoters & Publishers Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai.
9. Sawhney, G. S., Fundamentals of Mechanical Engineering, PHI




