MA101   CALCULAS (3-1-0-4)


MODULE I

Single Variable Calculus and Infinite series (Book I -sec 9.3, 9.5, 9.6, 9.8) 

Basic ideas of infinite series and convergence - Geometric series- Harmonic series-Convergence tests-comparison, ratio, root tests (without proof). Alternating series- Leibnitz TestAbsolute convergence, Maclaurins series-Taylor series - radius of convergence. 

MODULE II

Partial derivatives and its applications(Book I -sec. 13.3 to 13.5 and 13.8) 

Partial derivatives-Partial derivatives of functions of more than two variables - higher order partial derivatives -differentiability, differentials and local linearity - 
The chain rule - Maxima and Minima of functions of two variables - extreme value theorem (without proof)-relative extrema.

--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Calculus of vector valued functions(Book I- 12.1,12.2,12.4&12.6,13.6 &13.7)

Introduction to vector valued functions- parametric curves in 3-space

Limits and continuity - derivatives - tangent lines - derivative of dot and cross product-  definite integrals of vector valued functions-  unit tangent-normal- velocity-acceleration and speed -Normal and tangential components of acceleration. Directional derivatives and gradients-tangent planes and normal vectors 


MODULE IV 

Multiple integrals(Book I-sec. 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.5)

Double integrals- Evaluation of double integrals - Double integrals in non-rectangular coordinates- reversing the order of integration- Area calculated as a double integral- Triple integrals(Cartesian co ordinates only)- volume calculated as a triple integral-(applications of results only)

--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Topics in vector calculus (Book I-15.1, 15.2, 15.3)

Vector and scalar fields- Gradient fields - conservative fields and potential functions - divergence and curl - the ? operator - the Laplacian?2 , Line integrals - work as a line integralindependence of path-conservative vector field 

MODULE VI 

Topics in vector calculus (continued) (Book I sec., 15.4, 15.5, 15.7, 15.8)

Green's Theorem (without proof- only for simply connected region in plane), surface integrals - Divergence Theorem (without proof for evaluating surface integrals), Stokes' Theorem (without proof for evaluating line integrals)


Text Book: 


1. Anton, Bivens, Davis: Calculus, John Wiley and Sons, 10thed
2. Thomas Jr., G. B., Weir, M. D. and Hass, J. R., Thomas' Calculus, Pearson. 


References: 


1. Sengar and Singh, Advanced Calculus, Cengage Learning, Ist Edition
2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley India edition, 10thed.
3. B. S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi.
4. N. P. Bali, Manish Goyal, Engineering Mathematics, Lakshmy Publications
5. D. W. Jordan, P Smith. Mathematical Techniques, Oxford University Press, 4th Edition.
6. A C Srivastava, P K Srivasthava, Engineering Mathematics Vol 1. PHI Learning Private Limited, New Delhi.
