CE100 BASICS OF CIVIL ENGINEERING  (2-1-0-3)

MODULE 1


General Introduction to Civil Engineering - Various disciplines of Civil engineering, Relevance of Civil engineering in the overall infrastructural development of the country.
Introduction to types of buildings as per NBC; Selection of site for buildings.
Components of a residential building and their functions. Introduction to industrial buildings - office / factory / software development office / power house /electronic equipment service centre (any one related to the branch of study)
Students have to visit one such building and submit an assignment about the features of any one of the listed building related to their branch (Not included for exam).


MODULE 2


Building planning - Introduction to planning of residential buildings- Site plan, Orientation of a building, Open space requirements, Position of doors and windows, Size of rooms; Preparation of a scaled sketch of the plan of a single storeyed residential building in a given site plan.
Introduction to the various building area terms - Computation of plinth area / built up area, Floor area / carpet area - for a simple single storeyed building; Setting out of a building.


MODULE 3


Surveying - Principles and objectives of surveying;
Horizontal measurements - instruments used - tape, types of tapes; Ranging (direct ranging only) - instruments used for ranging.
Levelling - Definitions, principles, Instruments (brief discussion only) - Level field book - Reduction of levels - problems on levelling (height of collimation only).
Modern surveying instruments - Electronic distance meter, digital level,total station, GPS (Brief discussion only).


MODULE 4


Building materials - Bricks, cement blocks - Properties and specifications.
Cement - OPC, properties, grades; other types of cement and its uses (inbrief).
Cement mortar - constituents, preparation.
Concrete - PCC and RCC - grades.
Steel - Use of steel in building construction, types and market forms.


MODULE 5


Building construction - Foundations; Bearing capacity of soil (definition only); Functions of foundations, Types - shallow and deep (sketches only).
Brick masonry - header and stretcher bond, English bonds - Elevation and plan (one brick thick walls only).
Roofs - functions, types, roofing materials (brief discussion only).
Floors - functions, types; flooring materials (brief discussion only).
Decorative finishes - Plastering - Purpose, procedure.
Paints and Painting - Purpose, types, preparation of surfaces for painting (brief discussion only).


MODULE 6


Basic infrastructure and services - Elevators, escalators, ramps, air conditioning, sound proofing (Civil engineering aspects only)
Towers, Chimneys, Water tanks (brief discussion only).
Concept of intelligent buildings.

References Books:

1. Bhattacharya, S. K., Basic Electrical & Electronics Engineering, Pearson
2. Bird, J., Electrical Circuit Theory and Technology, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group
3. Del Toro, V., Electrical Engineering Fundamentals, Prentice Hall of India.
4. Hayt, W. H., Kemmerly, J. E., and Durbin, S. M., Engineering Circuit Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill
5. Hughes, Electrical and Electronic Technology, Pearson Education
6. Mehta, V. K. and Mehta, R., Basic Electrical Engineering, S. Chand Publishing
7. Parker and Smith, Problems in Electrical Engineering, CBS Publishers and Distributors
8. Sudhakar and Syam Mohan, Circuits and Networks Analysis and Synthesis, Tata McGraw Hill
9. Suresh Kumar, K. S, Electric Circuits and Networks, Pearson Education
