BE103 INTRODUCTION TO SUSTAINABLE ENGINEERING  (2-0-1-3)


MODULE 1

Sustainability - Introduction, Need and concept of sustainability, Social-environmental and economic sustainability concepts. Sustainable development, Nexus between Technology and Sustainable development,Challenges for Sustainable Development. Multilateral environmental agreements and Protocols - Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), Environmental legislations in India - Water Act, Air Act.

Students may be assigned to do at least one project eg:
a) Identifying/assessment of sustainability in your neighbourhood ineducation, housing, water resources, energy resources, food supplies, land
use, environmental protection etc.
b) Identify the threats for sustainability in any selected area and explore solutions for the same


MODULE 2

Air Pollution, Effects of Air Pollution; Water pollution- sources, Sustainable wastewater treatment, Solid waste - sources, impacts of solid waste, Zero waste concept, 3 R concept. Global environmental issues- Resource degradation, Climate change, Global warming, Ozone layer depletion, Regional and Local Environmental Issues. Carbon credits and carbon trading, carbon foot print.

Students may be assigned to do at least one project for eg:
a) Assessing the pollution status of a small area
b) Programmes for enhancing public environmental awareness
c) Observe a pond nearby and think about the different measures that can be adopted for its conservation


---FIRST INTERNALS---


MODULE 3

Environmental management standards, ISO 14000 series, Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) - Scope and Goal, Bio-mimicking, Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) - Procedures of EIA in India.

Students may be assigned to do at least one project eg:
a) Conducting LCA of products (eg. Aluminium cans, PVC bottles, cars etc. or activities (Comparison of land filling and open burning)
b) Conducting an EIA study of a small project (eg. Construction of a building)


MODULE 4

Basic concepts of sustainable habitat, Green buildings, green materials for building construction, material selection for sustainable design, green building certification, Methods for increasing energy efficiency of buildings. Sustainable cities, Sustainable transport.

Students may be assigned to do at least one project eg:
a) Consider the design aspects of a sustainable building for your campus
b) Explore the different methods that can be adopted for maintaining a sustainable transport system in your city.


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE 5

Energy sources: Basic concepts-Conventional and non-conventional, solar energy, Fuel cells, Wind energy, Small hydro plants, bio-fuels, Energy derived from oceans, Geothermal energy.

Students may be assigned to do at least one project eg:
a) Find out the energy savings that can be achieved by the installation of a solar water heater
b) Conduct a feasibility study for the installation of wind mills in Kerala


MODULE 6

Green Engineering, Sustainable Urbanisation, industrialisation and poverty reduction; Social and technological change, Industrial Processes: Material selection, Pollution Prevention, Industrial Ecology, Industrial symbiosis.

Students may be assigned to do a group project eg:
a) Collect details for instances of climate change in your locality
b) Find out the carbon credits you can gain by using a sustainable transport system (travelling in a cycle or car pooling from college to home)
c) Have a debate on the topics like: Industrial Ecology is a Boon or Bane for Industries?/Are we scaring the people on Climate Change unnecessarily?/Technology enables Development sustainable or the root cause of unsustainability?


Reference Books:
1. Allen, D. T. and Shonnard, D. R., Sustainability Engineering: Concepts, Design and Case Studies, Prentice Hall.
2. Bradley. A.S; Adebayo,A.O., Maria, P. Engineering applications in sustainable design and development, Cengage learning
3. Environment Impact Assessment Guidelines, Notification of Government of India, 2006
4. Mackenthun, K.M., Basic Concepts in Environmental Management, Lewis Publication, London, 1998
5. ECBC Code 2007, Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi Bureau of Energy Efficiency Publications-Rating System, TERI Publications - GRIHA Rating System
6. Ni bin Chang, Systems Analysis for Sustainable Engineering: Theory and Applications, McGraw-Hill Professional.
7. Twidell, J. W. and Weir, A. D., Renewable Energy Resources, English Language Book Society (ELBS).
8. Purohit, S. S., Green Technology - An approach for sustainable environment, Agrobios publication


