FT206 Food Biotechnology 3-0-0-3



MODULE I

Introduction to Biotechnology 
Application of Biotechnology in Food, Pharmaceutical and other Industries. Basics of Molecular Biology - Chemistry and Biology of DNA, RNA and proteins-DNA replication, transcription and translation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 


MODULE II 

Genetic Engineering 
Regulation of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, Recombinant DNA Technology, Basics of strain improvement techniques, Vectors in Biotechnology, Plant tissue culture, Animal /Insect cell culture as a tool of biotechnology. 


FIRST INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE III 

Traditional Application of Food Biotechnology Fermented Foods: Dairy products, Oriental fermentations, Alcoholic Beverages and food ingredients. Types of fermented foods and importance of food fermentations in food preservation and nutritional enhancement. 


MODULE IV 
  
Production of primary and Secondary Metabolites Process of production of commercially important organic acids-Citric Acid, Lactic Acid, Gluconic Acid, Amino acids. Bioproducts for food industries-SCP, Mushroom. Natural Biopreservatives-Nisin. Development and formulation of novel food products-Probiotic Foods. 


SECOND INTERNAL EXAMINATION 


MODULE V 

GM and Functional Foods 
Nutrogenomics-concepts, working, significance and relevance- Nutraceuticals and Functional Foods. 
Genetically Modified Foods-Plant and Animal origin. Ethical issues concerning GM Foods, testing for Genetically modified organisms. 
Current guidelines-production, release and movement of GMO's, labelling and traceability-Biosafety- Public perception of GM foods, GMO Act- 2004

 
MODULE VI 

Enzymes of Importance in Food 
Role of immobilized enzymes in food processing-Endogenous enzymes in food quality- colour, texture, flavour and nutritional quality. 
Application of enzymes in Bakery, Meat, Fruit, Vegetable and Dairy Industries. 


Text Book: 
1. Joshi,V.K and  Singh,R.S, "Food Biotechnology Principles and Practices", IK International Publishing House Pvt.Ltd 
2. Satyanarayana U, "Biotechnology", Arunavazhan Publishers 
3. National Research Council -"Application of Biotechnology to traditional fermented foods", National Academy Press, Washington,1992. 
 
References: 
1.  David Latchman,  Basic Molecular and Cell Biology, 3rd Edition., BMJ Publishing group,1997. First Indian Reprint 2006. 
2. Gene cloning and DNA Analysis- An Introduction-4th Edition, T.A. Brown Publishers, Blackwell Sciences Ltd. UK , 2001. 
3. H.S.Chawla,  Introduction to plant Biotechnology,2nd Edition , Oxford Publishers and IBH Publishing Company Pvt. Ltd, New Delhi. 
4. Lopez G.I.G and Canovas,G.V.B  Food Science and Food Biotechnology, , CRC Press,Florida,USA 2003. 
5.  Joshi .V.K and Pandey Biotechnology : Food Fermentations, Vol 1 and 2,  Education Publishers,2002. 
6. Lee,B.H  Joshi,V.K  and Pandey A,  Fundamentals of Food Biotechnology,  1999 
7. Rita Singh,   Food Biotechnology, Global Vision Publication House, Delhi, 2004