MP206 Foundry Technology 3-0-0-3 


MODULE I

Introduction to foundry, Steps involved in casting, Advantages and limitations of casting process, Design and metallurgical advantages, applications of casting process.


MODULE II

Pattern design and making, Pattern types and materials- factor effecting the choice of pattern materials, use of different types of patterns, pattern allowances, pattern materials, color coding of pattern.


--FIRST INTERNAL--


MODULE III

Molding: Sand moulding procedure, types of sand moulding, ingredients and the properties of moulding sand, sand conditioning, sand preparation equipment. Specification and testing of moulding sands- grain size sieve analysis, green and dry strength, hardness test, permeability and moisture content. Core: types, core materials, core boxes, core sand 


MODULE IV 

Casting Design: Metallurgical consideration, design consideration, economical consideration. Solidification and microstructure development of castings, mechanism of dentritic growth, solidification rate and time, Chvorinov's rule. Gating and risering: functions of gating and risering system, design of sprue, gating ratio, riser design. 


--SECOND INTERNAL--


MODULE V 

Casting techniques: types of casting processes and applications; permanent mould casting, pressure die casting, squeeze casting, centrifugal casting, continuous casting, electro-slag casting, shell moulding, CO2 moulding, fettling, heat treatments for casting, casting defects and inspection of castings. 


MODULE VI 

Modernisation and mechnisation of foundries: Need, area for mechanisation, material handling, pollution control in foundries, pollutants in a foundry, pPlant layout for foundries, steps in planning a foundry layout.  Application of CAD/CAM in foundry. Casting of complicated shapes - automotive components.


References 
1. Jain, P. L., "Principles of foundry technology", Tata McGraw-Hill Education. 
 2. Beeley, Peter., "Foundry technology", Butterworth-Heinemann. 
 3. Heine, Richard W., Carl R. Loper, and Philip C. Rosenthal, "Principles of metal casting", Tata McGraw-Hill Education. 
 4. Agarwal, R. L., T. R. Banga, and Tahil Manghnani, "Foundry Engineering", Khanna Pub. 
 5. Srinivasan, N.K., "Foundry Technology", 3rd Edition, Khanna Pub. 
 6. Howard, E. D., ed. "Modern foundry practice", Philosophical Library.  
 7. Taylor, Howard F., Merton C. Flemings, and John Wulff, "Foundry engineering", New York: Wiley.  
8. Ekey, David C., and Wesley P. Winter, "Introduction to foundry technology", McGraw-Hill.  
 9. Kalpakjian, Serope, Steven R. Schmid, and Chi-Wah Kok, "Manufacturing processes for 
10. "engineering materials", Pearson-Prentice Hall. 