CH205 Fluid and Particle Mechanics I (3-1-0-4)

MODULE 1


Continuum hypothesis, Definition of fluid, Newton's law of viscosity. Physical properties of fluid: Density, specific weight, specific volume, specific gravity, viscosity, compressibility & elasticity, surface tension & capillarity. Variation of viscosity and density with
temperature and pressure. Measurement of viscosity using Newton's law of viscosity (Coaxial cylinder viscometer). Rheology of fluids, Classification of fluids. 


MODULE 2


Pascal's law, Hydrostatic equilibrium in gravity and centrifugal field. Barometric equation. Principles of continuous gravity decanter and centrifugal decanter. Lapse rate. Principles of Manometer-Simple manometer, Differential manometer, Inclined tube manometer. Buoyancy and Floatation: Buoyancy, Buoyant Force and Centre of Buoyancy. Metacentre and Metacentric Height. Stability of submerged and floating bodies.


FIRST INTERNALS


MODULE 3


Introduction to fluid flow: Flow field, Eulerain and Lagrangian approach, velocity potential, stream function, circulation and vorticity. Stream line, Path line, Streak line, Stream tube. Classification of flow: Steady & unsteady flow, Uniform & non uniform flow, Rotational & irrotational flow. Reynolds experiment, Reynolds number, Turbulance, Reynolds stress, Flow in boundary-layers, Boundary-layer formation in straight tubes, Boundary-layer separation and wake formation.


MODULE 4


Basic equations of fluid flow: Continuity Equation, Macroscopic Momentum Balance (Navier-Stoke's equation), Bernoulli Equation, Kinetic energy correction factor, Correction for fluid friction, Pump work in Bernoullis equation.


SECOND INTERNALS


MODULE 5


Laminar flow of incompressible fluids in conduits and thin layers: Shear stress and Velocity distribution, Maximum and average velocity-Hagen Poiseuille equation-Definition of Friction factor on Reynolds number in laminar flow. Turbulent flow of incompressible fluids in pipes and conduits: Universal velocity distribution equation, Friction factor and Reynolds number relationship-Nikuradse and Karman equation-Blasius equation (derivation not required), Prandtl one seventh power law-Friction factor chart- Frction from changes in velocity or direction-Sudden 
expansion and contraction-Effect of fittings and valves. Flow of liquids in thin layers.


MODULE 6



Pipe and tubing, Joints and fittings, Valves - Gate valves and globe valves, Plug cokes and ball valves, Check valves. General Description and Flow rate equation for Venturi; Orifice; Flow Nozzle; Pitot tube; Rectangular, Triangular & Trapezoidal weir; Rotameter.



References Books:
1. McCabe W.L. & Smith J.C., Unit Operations of Chemical Engg, McGraw Hill
2. Streeter V.L., Fluid Mechanics, McGraw Hill
3. An Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, Joseph Katz, Cambridge University Press
4. Coulson J.M. & Richardson J.F., Chemical Engg. Vol. 1, Pergamon
5. Foust, Wenzel, Clump, Maus& Anderson, Principles of Unit Operation
6. Noel de Nerves, Fluid Mechanics for Chemical Engineers, McGraw Hill.
7. Fluid Dynamics and Heat Transfer, Knudsen and Katz.





