MODULE 1

Introduction to soil mechanics -Major soil deposits of India Basic soil properties - Void ratio, porosity, degree of  saturation, air content, percentage air voids, moisture content, specific gravity, unit weight - Relationship between basic soil properties -
Sensitivity - Thixotropy - numerical problems 


MODULE 2

Index properties - Sieve analysis - Well graded, poorly graded and gap graded soils - Stoke's law - Hydrometer analysis(no derivation required for percentage finer and diameter) - numerical problems- - Relative density Consistency-Atterberg Limits - Practical Applications - numerical problems I.S. classification of soils. 


MODULE 3


Permeability of soils - Darcy's law - Factors affecting permeability - Practical Applications - Constant head and falling head permeability tests - Average permeability of stratified deposits (no derivation required) - numerical problems. Principle of effective stress - Total , neutral and effective stress variation diagrams - Quick sand condition - Critical hydraulic gradient - - numerical problems- Definition of phreatic line and exit gradient. 


MODULE 4

Shear strength of soils- Practical Applications - Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion - Mohr circle method for determination of principal planes and stresses- numerical problems - relationship between shear parameters and principal stresses[no derivation required] Brief discussion of direct shear test, tri-axial compression test, vane shear test and unconfined compression test - Applicability - numerical problems -UU and CD tests [Brief discussion only] - Liquefaction


MODULE 5


Compressibility and Consolidation - Void ratio versus pressure relationship - Coefficient of compressibility and volume compressibility -
Compression index Practical Applications - Change in void ratio method - Height of solids method -Normally consolidated, under consolidated and over consolidated states - Estimation of pre consolidation pressure - Practical Applications - Estimation of magnitude of settlement of normally consolidated clays - Numerical problems Terzaghi's theory of one-dimensional consolidation(no derivation required) - average
degree of consolidation - Time factor - Coefficient of consolidation - Practical Applications -Square root of time and logarithm of time fitting methods - Numerical problems


MODULE 6


Stability of finite slopes - Toe failure, base failure, slip failure - Swedish Circle Method- Friction circle method- Factor of safety with respect to cohesion and angle of internal friction - Stability number - Stability charts - Methods to improve slope stability.
Compaction of soils - Standard Proctor, Modified Proctor, I.S. light & Heavy Compaction Tests - OMC - Zero Air voids line - Control of compaction - numerical problems 


Text Books:


1. Ranjan G. and A. S. R. Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, New Age International, 2002.
2. Das B. M., Principles of Geotechnical Engineering, Cengage India Pvt. Ltd., 2010.


References:


1. Taylor D.W., Fundamentals of Soil Mechanics, Asia Publishing House, 1948.
2. Arora K. R., Geotechnical Engineering, Standard Publishers, 2006.
3. Venkatramaiah, Geotechnical Engg, Universities Press, 2000.
4. Terzaghi K. and R. B. Peck, Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice, John Wiley, 1967.
5. Purushothamaraj P., Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Dorling Kindersley(India) Pvt. Ltd., 2013
6. A V Narasimha Rao and C Venkatramaiah, Numerical Problems, Examples and Objective questions in Geotechnical Engineering, Universities Press (India) Ltd., 2000



