CE202 Structural Analysis I  (3-1-0 -4)

MODULE 1


TRUSS ANALYSIS: Analysis of determinate truss- Methods of joints and sections
Displacement response of statically determinate
structural systems using energy methods: Elastic theorems and energy principles - strain energy due to axial load, bending moment, shear and
torsion - strain energy method, Castigliano's method for deflection


MODULE 2


Principle of virtual work - Unit load method-Betti"s  theorem - Maxwell"s law of reciprocal deflections - principle of least work - application of unit load method and strain energy method for determination of deflection of statically determinate beams, frames - pin
jointed trusses - temperature effects, lack of fit.
Statically indeterminate structures: Degree of static and kinematic indeterminacies - force and displacement method


MODULE 3


Strain Energy methods: Analysis of beams, frames and trusses with internal and external redundancy - effect of prestrain, lack of fit, temperature changes, support settlement.
Method of Consistent deformations: Analysis of beams frames and trusses with internal and external redundancy - effect of prestrain, lack
of fit, temperature changes, support settlement.


MODULE 4


Moving loads and influence lines.
Introduction to moving loads - concept of influence lines - influence lines for reaction, shear force and bending moment in simply supported beams and over hanging beams - influence lines for forces in beams and trusses analysis for and trusses analysis for different types of moving loads - single concentrated load - several concentrated loads uniformly distributed load shorter and longer than the span.


MODULE 5


Statically determinate suspension bridges and arches Analysis of forces in cables - temperature effects - suspension bridges with three hinged stiffening girders


MODULE 6


Statically indeterminate suspension bridges and arches.- theory of arches - Eddy's theorem - analysis of three hinged arches-suspension bridges with two hinged stiffening girders - analysis of two hinged arches - settlement and temperature effects.


Text Books:


1. Gere and Timoshenko, Mechanics of materials, CBS. Publishers
2. Kenneth Leet,Chia M Uang& Anne M Gilbert., Fundamentals of Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill


References:


1. M.L. Gambhir, Fundamentals of structural Mechanics and analysis, Printice Hall India
2. DevdasMenon, Structural Analysis, Narosa Publications
3. Reddy C.S., Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill
4. Kinney S., Indeterminate Structural Analysis, Oxford & IBH
5. Hibbeler., Structural Analysis, Pearson Education
6. Aslam Kassimali., Structural Analysis, Cenage Learning
7. Timoshenko S.P.& Young D.H., Theory of Structures, McGraw Hill
8. Harry H West & Louis F Geschwindner, Fundamentals of Structural Analysis, Wiley India Publisher
9. Wang C.K., Intermediate Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill
10. R.Vaidyanathan and P.Perumal, Comprehensive Structural Analysis Volume I & II, Laxmi Publications (P) Ltd